---
ref: "17"
title: "Nothing New Under the Sun"
subtitle: "A message from Jesus, identifying himself as 'the living Christ who lives in you'"
---

## I. Perfection

Beloveds of Heaven! I will always be by your side and in you. I am the most
Sacred Heart of Jesus. I am the one who walked the world as God being man,
teaching love. I am your friend. I am your being. I am the reason for the
existence of the universe and I am the universe itself. I am your essential
Soul. I am one with you and you are one with everything. I am the one who
watches over you day and night. I am what you are. I will always be by your
side. I am your faithful friend. I am the living Christ who lives in you. I am
the abode of light, from which all the light of holiness shines.

It seems difficult to love the world, but it is not. Or rather, it is as
difficult as you want it to be. We have come today to draw back the veil
between the wisdom of God and your understanding of love. The difficulty you
have in consciously extending love to the world lies in your way of thinking,
not only in relation to what you think love is, but in your mind itself, in
your mental process. That mode of functioning still remains in the inertia of
the egoic mode of thinking, and is an obstacle. You know it. You cannot love
with the mind, just as you cannot forgive with the mind. Love is not a matter
of thought. To love is to be. Or put another way, love is what you are. It has
nothing to do with something you do, think, or feel.

Love is not a feeling, nor a thought. Before you are fully ready to give the
world the love that has been given to you, you must understand some things. I
do not let you go to the world alone. I do not abandon you. I am always by your
side. I am helping you every day to carry love wherever it is that God wants
you to be, in perfect union with your true will.

First it is essential to remember that nothing can happen in your life that is
not God’s will for you. Not a single hair falls from your head without the
consent of the Father in Heaven. This was true even in the age of the ego. Now
that the ego is gone, imagine the true reality of your life and your
relationship with everything—now that you live in truth. Rightly understood,
this means that nothing happens without God and your acceptance, since your
will and His are one. Everything exists for your good and for the good of all
creation, including the agreement by which the ego dissolved and is no longer
part of your identity. You attracted to yourself everything that was necessary,
so that what was not true could crumble and give way to what is.

Brothers and sisters all over the world! Understand that you are perfect as you
are, and your lives are perfect as well. No life is better than any another.
There is no difference between you in what you are. Everyone is involved in
creating a story, the history of creation. This story had a beginning but will
never have an end. Realize that you are coming home. Some are more advanced
than others, but all are on the way back to love. You are all coming to my
heart like a river that flows down from the mountain, with power, toward the
ocean with which it merges, becoming one with immensity.

## II. Live Centered

Droplet of water, melt with the ocean of love that I am! Be not distracted by
thinking or looking at others. Just look at me. Stay always united with love.
Let others follow their path. You go on yours. Do not fall into the old traps
of the ego that, under a false charity, is apparently worried about the
salvation of all. This kept you separate from your being and caused too much
suffering. That trap has already been recognized so you will not fall into it
again. Do not worry about it. We only mention it so that it is recorded in your
memory a little more.

My daughter, my son! That which you see before your eyes, or takes place as if
it were a movie, is nothing other than God’s plan for you. Your life is a set
of realities that make up what should be, so that your path is perfect for the
purpose of God and for your true self, perfect for the purpose of remembering
who you are and returning to virginal consciousness. Your path, believe it or
not, allows you to get to Heaven faster. Saving time was always part of God’s
plan, and yours, too. It does not make sense to linger.

To live in the certainty that nothing happens in the divine plan that is not
perfect allows you to live in peace. It is the same as saying, “Thy will be
done.” “Be done” is the essence of peace.

If everything that happens in your life is perfect according to the joint plan
of God and your being, then you will be able to return more quickly and in a
more serene and peaceful way to original consciousness, the consciousness to
which you wish to return. The world would not arouse anything other than accep-
tance. The world, if you understand it well, is a springboard. The world allows
spirits to wake up to the truth and choose consciously. Some choose only love,
others do not. Only focus on those choosing love, because that is what your
coming to the world is about. It is about coming to choose only love. Remember
that I am speaking to you, individually. There is no such thing as a whole
world that I can speak to. God is not a God of masses. God is love and love is
identity and union in truth. Therefore, we need not think about what will
happen to everyone. I only care about you. And in that “you,” by a mysterious
way, the whole will be included, which has nothing to do with the worldly
concept of “all” or “world.”

With this memory of the perfection of your life in mind, I ask you, beloved
brother and sister, to accept the fact that there is no person, being, thing,
or circumstance that is not under my direction, and therefore under the
direction of love. In spite of everything you know this well in the bottom of
your heart where a hope that does not disappoint lives—the hope that everything
will turn out well. You know this, although often you do not remember it.
Certainly everything will be fine. Do not doubt this. God and you, your being
and my love, are always the universal winners, not in the sense of triumph of
the egoic thought system, but in truth.

## III. Individual Will

You attract everything that happens in your life. You cannot repeat this
enough. In the collective ego mind is the idea that destiny plays dice, or is
infatuated with the children of God, or submits them to what it wants. You do
not like some things that you have attracted. Some embarrass you. Some you may
see as saintly, some as great achievements on your part. Some you would like to
repeat, maybe a couple times more. Others you would prefer to be erased from
the book of life. All of this is part of the human experience. Everyone has
such variety in their lives. These comprise the set of nuances that together
are the human experience.

All human experiences on Earth are similar—never the same, but always similar.
This is because you are all alike, though not identical. The life of a bird is
how the experience of a bird should be. The same happens with trees, and within
this, the particular experiences of each species. Some experience cold and
snow, others the heat of deserts or the exuberance of the jungle. To believe
that the life of your brothers or sisters is different from yours is to focus
only on the surface. Look a little deeper, as you now can, and you will calmly
observe that everything is the same. Brother, sister, there is nothing new
under the sun. Enjoy this truth.

All the world experiences the same drama of life—only the actors change. The
life of each of you is like a movie that repeats itself over and over
throughout the duration of time. It is always the same story, told in different
ways and performed by different actors wearing different costumes, but still
they are all similar. You have all come to the world to meet Christ. This alone
is why the Father of all things holy allows the existence of the universe of
form. No one who walks the Earth can avoid it. Everyone will see me. They will
see me because I am the truth, the way, and the life. I am the resurrection to
eternal life. I am the bridge that leads to the Father.

Once you accept that your life is not random, that nobody is playing with you,
much less are there dice—since chance as you conceive of it does not exist—then
we are ready to move ahead with the thought system that will help you to take
love to the world without fear. And once accepted, this fact will allow the
boundaries between the internal and the external, the inside and the outside,
the soul and the world, the holy and the profane, to fade. Those differences
disappear. Everything is reunited in the embrace of love. Everything, being a
union, returns to union. What returns to union returns to love because both are
the same.

