---
ref: "20"
title: "Mystery and Reverence"
subtitle: "A message from Holy Virgin Mary"
---

## I. Prelude

My children, I am the Mother of God. I am the Immaculate Conception. I speak
to you from the only place where my voice is spoken, from the love that God is.
I am all yours. All my children have the right to my loving heart as the Mother
of God.

Today I want to spend time with you, my children, who are saturated by the
waves of the world’s madness. I want you to know surely that I am always by
your side. The distance that exists between you and me is even less than that
between you and what you are. You live in difficult times. This must not be
denied, since all denial is unconsciousness. But these difficult times should
not discourage you. These times are times of the birth of the new. In every
birth there is pain. The birth pangs of the universe are what you experience
now. But I assure you that those pains are evidence of the triumphant
manifestation of my Immaculate Heart.

I remind you of these things so that you are prepared and at peace. Such times
have long been a source of anguish for many of my children. But it must not be
so for you, since you have crossed the threshold of truth. You well know that
God exists and that you are one with Him. You know that you live in the unity
of the three hearts. You know the wisdom of love. Seek not for more wisdom;
nothing more is needed except to know that you are loved unconditionally by
Heaven. You need to feel my love. You need to experience the warmth of the
embrace of my divine son Jesus. You have the right to receive the tender kiss
of the Holy Spirit, and to listen to the melodies of Heaven that the angels of
God sing without ceasing.

## II. Pain, Mystery

Children of Heaven! All must go through the path of redemptive passion and the
cross. This is not a punishment, nor a defect within creation. I come not to
criticize or make you bitter, but to serve. I am the eternal servant of my
beloved children. I am the servant of the Lord. Let the cross no longer be a
scandal; denying it makes no sense. Likewise to say that the cross is a
punishment in order to rise to a greater Heaven is an outrage to truth. The
cross is the cross. Simply that. Pain is pain, which must be integrated into
the experience of being. Pain is always the pain of birth, and can be
experienced emotionally or in the physical body. It does not matter.

I talk to you of such things because you need to understand that pain is not
something from which to flee. Neither is it something you must go through,
thinking you must act this way or that. Rather, simply allow pain whenever it
makes an appearance and let it go whenever it departs. Every pain is
temporary; it always passes. The same must occur with joy. Remember
that everything happens. Pain is a mystery, as is life. The path to peace
requires it. It is not helpful to try to understand what cannot be understood.

My children, I have chosen the theme of pain to take your hearts where you
still feel a little uncomfortable. I do it because it is important to accept
that not everything can be comprehended. Unwanted states usually represent
areas that lack understanding. This is an area of concern from which I have
come to free you, today and forever.

Pain is pain. Life is life. Everything is what it is. These are not syllogisms
or circular truths but the simple truth—so simple that it is often overlooked.
As a loving Mother I invite you to live in the simplicity of your heart. This
is what this most holy message concerns, which the Father wants us to have in
this holy hour. Remember, my children, that the blessed manifestation
expressed in words here is a gift from the Father. In His infinite goodness He
has allowed me to spend some time in union with Earth in this way.

When I speak to you, it is God Himself who speaks to you through my voice. And
when God speaks to man, Heaven and Earth are one. This does not mean that
previously they were not, but that when you are ready to hear the voice of God
in your heart, you become aware of truth. There is no such thing as Heaven over
there and Earth over here. Earth and Heaven are one, inseparable. Your humanity
and your divinity are an undivided unity, inseparable. Separation never
existed except in solitary consciousness.

Some things must remain a mystery. Not everything must be discovered. In this
time of confusion, this time of waiting for love, a time of the birth of the
new, it is an error to seek to remove all veils. Although eternal truth resides
in your memory, and truth must be brought to light, it is also the case that
some things arise from misunderstanding certain aspects of divinity. Therein
lies mystery, the unknown.

The mystery of pain must remain a mystery, along with the mystery of life.

Holy children! You who travel the path of simple spirituality, remember how
often you tried to interpret your dreams, tried to reveal your future, tried to
go beyond what can be known. Do not try to discover the mystery of the Holy
Trinity, nor the mystery of life, because it cannot be known. From all eternity
God has wanted mystery to exist. Accepting this is important. Abandon the
compulsion of the thinking mind. I am asking you to stop looking for meaning in
things.

Wisdom cannot be learned, nor has wisdom anything to do with the evolution of
thought, nor has wisdom any part of indoctrinating the mind or filling it
with information. You already know that being learned does not mean being wise.

## III. Wisdom

I am the Mother of God and therefore the Mother of Wisdom. I am the delight of
God, because God loves the taste of true knowledge. Bear this in mind and
remember that you are also the delight of a God who is perfect love. When you
are told to let yourself love, you are also being told to let the wisdom of God
flood your mind and your heart. Together we are coming to the end of these
messages, but not to the end of consciously welcoming the wisdom of love. This,
and only this, will forever erase the ignorance that ruled the mind. Knowledge
is of the wise, not to be mistaken with pseudo-knowledge that could be owned by
some and not by all. Wisdom that cannot shared by all creation is not true
wisdom.

The world has taught you to find the mechanisms of power with which to dominate
and survive. Information is part of the dynamic of mundane power. Having
information that others do not possess is necessary for mastery. Information is
power, as it is said. Often you can dominate others when you know things they
do not. The rampant race to know more and dominate more has no relation to true
wisdom.

The cornerstone of the thought system of the world is survival—survival not
only of the body but also of the mind and its ideas. In this fight you have
built many weapons, both visible and, as in the case of information, invisible.
Your current world plays havoc with your peace of mind. If you want to bring
Heaven to Earth, information must always be subject to love. Using any type of
information to exercise power is a form of abuse and causes pain. Thus you can
see the difference between accessing information and wisdom, between being
informed and being wise.

What comes from God cannot be used. This includes love, being, and wisdom, as
well as everything else that God is. The wisdom that cannot be used often makes
it feared, as it is with love. In fact, the fear of love comes from the
absolute impossibility of it being used. You cannot use love. You cannot use
God. You cannot use wisdom. You cannot use your being.

Wisdom and love are one and the same. I invite you, from the Heaven of your
holy heart, to let yourself be loved. Let the wisdom of Heaven be your faithful
companion. I assure you that wisdom is closer to you than the distance between
you and yourself. Wisdom is what created you. Wisdom is the beauty in which you
exist. She exists before anything exists. In wisdom were all things created.
All creatures live by it and in it. The wisdom of life is what sustains the
universe. Without wisdom you could not exist. Every being receives wisdom.
Wisdom can neither be learned nor taught. However, receiving wisdom, as with
receiving love, is not the same as sharing it.

Sharing the wisdom of your heart is love. Thus we unite the three strands that
we have considered in this most pure and holy love message: the thread of the
mystery of the unknown and unknowable, the thread of wisdom, and the thread of
love.

Mystery, wisdom, and love are truly one and the same.

## IV. Christ and Wisdom

From the depth of my Immaculate Heart, I invite you once again to put aside all
worldly knowledge and encourage you to live life differently. I invite you to
live life in the manner of Christ. In one part of your being resides the Wisdom
of Heaven, because Christ is wisdom. Wisdom is not information—it is your
being. The being of infinite wisdom is what created you. In that being is where
you are as God created you. In the Wisdom of Love is where truth lies. Let
mystery remain a mystery, for that is what it is. Do not lose peace by seeking
to know what cannot be understood, and what is not necessary to understand.
Remember that you often seek to know, not out of love for wisdom, but simply to
feel more powerful than your brothers and sisters, or not to feel inferior.
None of that is of Christ. God is not interested, and neither are you, in vain
games of dominance or power struggles that lead nowhere.

I am speaking of wisdom and power and of the difference between information and
knowledge, which is the same as the difference between being and not being.
Being is, by definition, of wisdom; where there is no wisdom, there is no
life. The question is not simply between being or not being, but between
knowing and not knowing. If you do not live in wisdom, you cannot live as God
created you to be.

Immerse yourself in the silence of your heart. Worry not. Let go of all thought
of what makes you suffer, as well as all thought of the future. Stay in the
presence of my holy love. In this eternal now, you and I are one forever. Stay
here with me. Close the doors and windows of your mind and begin to hear the
ancestral voice that, although forgotten, you have always loved. Listen to
Heaven calling you from all eternity to live in the peace of God. Listen to
wisdom speak to you, literally, telling you what you should know now— never
telling you beforehand nor after the need has passed. Everything you should
know, you will know at the right time, and what is not necessary to know you
will never know. There is nothing that is too much for you in life. God does
not exceed what should be.

Be silent and begin to let the feeling of reverence for life flow. That
reverence is wisdom itself. In that holy silence, we both abide, mother and
child, praying without words to the Father of love. We are silent so that we
can hear. We open our hands to be able to receive. We enter the unity of being.
We stay in the Heaven of our hearts. In that unity we include all creation, not
the creation of our limited understanding, but of all truth. We embrace the
mystery and enter the temple of our holy hearts with complete reverence and
respect. And we hear the voice of the wisdom of love.

