--- 
ref: "Chapter Eight"
title: "The Holy Instant"
---

What if I were to tell you your homecoming, the full reestablishment of Truth
in your consciousness, is but a moment away. In time, it seems like an almost
mythical state, a goal so difficult to reach it lies somewhere in the future,
attainable only after a long period of struggle. As long as you believe in
sequential time will this be true for you, yet is that only a belief. It cannot
be true that the Self, what you are and have always been, cannot be realized
here and now. Only the false ideas that fill your mind, limiting it and
distorting your perception, stand between your present state and the unified
awareness of the Self. While it is true that for most who are lost in space and
time, the process of undo­ing the false mind appears to be a lengthy one, this
need not be.

At any moment, the Truth can shine into your mind and lift you above the
illusion, if that is what you want and you are willing to meet Its conditions.
The holy instant is waiting for you to let Truth into your awareness at any
moment. Never is it far away, requiring a lengthy period of preparation to make
your mind available to its coming. The Holy Spirit's gifts to you require only
that you be willing to receive them without trying to control the conditions
under which they are given. For that reason, they are always available,
independent of the apparent conditions of time. The Holy Spirit works in time
but is not limited by it; His gifts are constantly given, coming from God Who
knows not time. 

The insistence that you must be prepared to receive what the Holy Spirit would
give, prevents the reception of what you desperately need. This is simply a
delaying tactic, an expression of unconscious resistance. What could be easier
than to simply accept what is so freely given and obviously valuable? The
constant need to control circumstances and conditions, very effectively keeps
God away. To do this is to identify with the ego's obsessive need to control,
for it believes its safety depends on it. Believing itself to be constantly
under threat, the conditions of life must be maintained according to the ego's
liking. What can only be experienced in the present is very threatening to the
ego, which al­ways tries to limit the present by using it to reinforce the past
and thus control the future. 

What is important to the Holy Spirit's purpose is unknown to the ego. What the
ego judges as important is overlooked by the Holy Spirit, for He recognizes all
things of the ego are meaningless. What is meaningless does not exist. You must
learn to overlook the ego's expression and its values if you are to replace
illusion with Truth. Be aware of the movement of illusion in your mind,
recognize it for what it is and choose again. Do this again and again and
again, each moment and each minute and each hour until the momentum of illusion
is reversed. Truth will take its place in your affections, loosening the
shackles that have bound you for so long. 

Only your willing cooperation with the ego's plan to maintain separation, keeps
you a prisoner to what you do not truly want. You are complicit in your own
destruction. The ego has only the hold over your mind that you have given it.
As you become aware of this fact and of the ego's goal, the insanity of your
choice of the ego as your guide becomes obvious and cannot be denied. The
reluctance to accept this recognition, to choose again, will delay your
homecoming. The life of separation is all you know; allegiance to the ego has
been unquestioned for so long that you have forgotten your real Self. 

The Christ has not forgotten you. He is waiting for the invitation to reveal
His Presence in your mind, and will do so just as soon as you are ready. Do not
delay this homecoming. Let the Holy Spirit teach you to recognize the errors
you are making, the false beliefs in your mind and the actions that follow. Let
Him correct your thoughts and return your mind to the ways of Truth. There is
nothing else to be done; all else is just the perpetuation of the past with all
its confusion, pain and suffering. Return to the present, the only moment there
is, and discover where you are and what you have forgotten. Let the Holy Spirit
reveal the place whereon you stand, the depth from which you come. 

Not a moment will He waste; no effort on your part will not be rewarded and
strengthened through His constant help and Presence. To your little willingness
is added His own, making it a mighty force for change. You need do nothing by
yourself, for He is always there, giving you what you need, telling you what
you need to know, furthering your understanding. Now is the time to begin in
earnest. Do not wait. Procrastination accomplishes nothing and merely prolongs
the time of ignorance of your true purpose. If suffering has lost its appeal,
and pleasure and pain seen as they are, you will not hesitate to consecrate
your life to a higher purpose. 

To delay the inevitable will bring no benefit, being the dedication to preserve
separation and find safety and satisfaction in a world where they are absent.
Happiness cannot be found while you build your house on shifting sands. There
is no reason to pursue goals whose purpose is to conceal their meaninglessness.
Your life lacks meaning while you seek for it where it cannot be found;
meaning, like Truth, is within. It lies not outside of you, hidden among the
shadows that seemingly surround you. Life's purpose is revealed to you when you
desire this above all else. Do not give purpose to what is purposeless, to that
which conceals real purpose and meaning through its frantic activity and
constant diversions. You were not meant to wander distractedly across a barren
landscape occupied by phantoms that seem to come and go. Your Father has
created you for a purpose; let the Holy Spirit teach you where purpose can be
found.

## Let Go The False
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Now is the opportunity to leave behind all that you do not need. To reach the
heights, the gates of Heaven, you must lighten your load by throwing out what
is false and unnecessary. The constant exercise of judgment, a function that is
not yours, is exhausting you and sapping your strength. Do not continue the
same mistakes over and over and reap the same undesirable consequences. All the
suffering in your life is the result of the belief in judgment, sin, and guilt.
Lay down this sword you hold against your own throat to keep Love away. Only
the constant and chaotic activity of your mind denies the Truth and keeps Love
from your awareness. 

Allow the Holy Spirit to train your mind to let go the false and make room for
the true. Let Him teach you the difference between Truth and illusion, and
learn to become aware of the constant choices you are making. Learn to become
consistent in your choosing of Truth over illusion. Turn decision making over
to the One Whose function it is. Give Him your willingness that He may augment
it with His own. The purified mind is empty, quiet, ready to welcome Truth as
It comes. Be willing and welcoming; that is enough. Do not set your sights low,
aim high. Your goal is far above this world and beyond it. 

What you choose is up to you, the consequences will always follow. Choose Truth
and Heaven Itself will bend to help. Choose illusion and you will prolong your
unnecessary suffering. Thank the Holy Spirit and the Christ within you. Never
forget them, the Truth of what you are, and the help that is always given. Make
yourself available to receive help, and develop the clarity to use it
effectively. 

## All Is Done
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Do you know what is truly needed in every situation, what words will help, what
action is called for? In all honesty you must admit you do not. Your ideas
about what to do and what to say are too often determined by the past. Seldom
are your truly present, without preconceived ideas that limit your
understanding and shape your response. There is One however, Who knows always
what help is needed, what can be given and received by everyone, with only good
resulting for all. Do let Him guide your thoughts, words, and actions, your
perceptions and understanding. His is the help you need. His is the help you
want. Let this be the guiding principle of your life: He knows and I do not. Do
not let your ignorance and the unconscious conceit that you know what you do
not, cripple your mind and distort your responses. 

Each day, every day, is given over to the Holy Spirit and dedicated to learning
the lessons presented, thus fulfilling your responsibility. Nothing else need
be done but do not forget to do nothing less. Whatever you are asked to do, do
it cheerfully, with abundant willingness. All tasks assigned are for your
highest good; you will only gain thereby. It may not be clear to you always
that this is true, for the idea of sacrifice and the belief you must understand
what you do before you do it, has been well established in your mind for a very
long time. You must remember always you know nothing. This consistent
remembrance frees your mind to allow the Holy Spirit to direct your life. In
this way you can be consistently helpful to yourself and your brothers. 

All that needs be done is done, all lessons assigned are learned; nothing is
left undone or unlearned. The Holy Spirit holds the plan for the day for each
one and all the people you will meet. He guides you throughout the day, helping
you learn what is to be learned, inspiring your words and actions. His Love and
strength are available for you to use; He is holding them for you until you are
ready to accept them for yourself. The Love of God and the strength of God were
given in your creation. They are your birthright. You cannot lose what was
given by God although you can refuse to hold it in your awareness. The Holy
Spirit holds everything that is yours, all that you have forgotten, until you
are ready to allow its memory to return. 

## Ignorance and Wisdom
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

The admission of ignorance is the beginning of wisdom. A very unfortunate
characteristic of those blinded by their own ignorance is that they do not
realize the state they are in. They do not realize they know nothing. Until
this is recognized, your ignorance will be taken for understanding, and only
the perpetuation of illusion and the suffering it brings will result. To know
that you do not know is the awareness that makes room for true learning to
occur. Full of its own ideas and beliefs, the mind cannot receive what is true
and greatly needed. An undoing of the mind is absolutely necessary; all belief
in illusion must be relinquished, all ideas that lead nowhere given up.
Confidence in your ability to understand on your own, to figure things out,
must be replaced by trust in the Holy Spirit and the willingness to learn what
He teaches. Your understanding is always based on the thought system to which
you adhere. You never learn on your own just as no decisions are made in
isolation. You learn and you decide with the help of one of two possible
teachers: the Holy Spirit or the ego. There are no others. 

What is necessary always is to be aware of which teacher you are listening to
at all times. From the teacher you choose, comes the lessons you learn. You
never learn alone; you always teach those who share a lesson with you what you
are learning. Teach fear and separation and you will suffer. Teach only Love
and Unity and all are blessed together. There is nothing you cannot do when
joined with your brothers through the power of Love and forgiveness. Your
lessons in forgiveness are learned for all; that learning will spread till it
covers the earth. 

To do that which must be done requires a sorting out of what is necessary from
what is not. Giving much time and energy to what is not needed is
characteristic of the sleeping mind. By so doing, the mind is kept in a
constant state of confusion about what is valuable and helpful and what is
valueless. Under these conditions, reaching a state of clarity is impossible.
You must be willing to let the Holy Spirit guide the process of sorting out
what must be done from what must be discarded. Until this sorting out is
accomplished to a meaningful degree, consistent decision making is not
possible.

To do what is asked of you, what is required of you, is the way to happiness
and salvation. This includes not only your actions and the words you speak, but
also your thoughts, feelings, and attitudes. Everything in your mind and life,
all the various parts of you, must be brought into alignment with a single
purpose. There is no need to do anything on your own. To relinquish control of
decision making, to turn it over, is a necessary condition for salvation to be
given you. The need to control life, to control the present and plan for the
future based on what was learned in the past, is the ego's response to its own
uncertainty. To know nothing is to be uncertain, and the ego knows nothing. 

You have one responsibility: to accept the Atonement for yourself. This is very
simple in principle, yet in practice it may take a long time before its
simplicity is apparent. Your mind is very complicated, being composed of
different levels of awareness, many different thoughts and beliefs that often
conflict, various impulses, tendencies, moods, feelings, emotions and
attitudes. Thoughts and feelings chase each other across the surface of your
aware­ness like clouds across the sky, driven by the wind. Constantly changing,
giving you no rest, this confusing and apparently complex activity must be
skillfully undone. 

Complexity cannot be met with more complexity; this merely confuses the mind
even more. The great complexity of mind is itself a condition of confusion and
contradiction. You cannot undo confusion by increasing it. Confusion is undone
by the application of clarity which must come from beyond the mind lost in its
own complexity. The Holy Spirit teaches you the only meaningful distinction
that can be made regarding the content and activity of your mind. Everything
that arises in your awareness, all that you experience within or without, is
either true or not true. No other distinction can be made that is meaningful or
helpful. Truth or illusion are all that you can ever choose between. 

Let this simple understanding be the basis from which you approach the chaotic
maelstrom that is the ego mind. Its simplicity will cut through the layers of
complexity and confusion that blind you to the Truth within. As you learn to
distinguish the true from the false consistently, clarity and peace will return
to your mind, replacing its frantic activity with a quiet certainty. 

There are no meaningful distinctions to be made between illusions; no matter
what form they may take, the content is the same. Form is but the veil
concealing content. You must learn to look past the veil and discern what lies
behind it. The Holy Spirit will teach you to perceive truly, that confusion may
leave your mind. He will guide your decisions and He always chooses what is
good and true. As decision making becomes consistent with the help of the Guide
God has given you, you will see the road rise up before you, stretching to the
gates of Heaven. 

Whenever a decision needs to be made, remember Whose function it is. This is
particularly difficult for those who continue to assert their autonomy, the
need to control life according to one's liking and preferences. What you like,
what you prefer, is habit determined by past learning. Remember always that you
were badly taught. You are unable to tell the difference between pain and
pleasure though you think you can. You do not know what anything means, what it
is for, yet are unaware of this fact. In your attempts to control life, you are
always operating from the past with the ego as your guide. Allowing the one who
knows nothing to guide your decisions is asking for disaster. It is extremely
important to become aware of the ego's motives and its complete unsuitability
to be your guide, and to face this fact honestly. Otherwise you will not
relinquish your habitual dependency on the ego, leaving no room for the Guide
given you by your Father to take its place. 

Nowhere can you find happiness but within your mind. It cannot be found
outside, for happiness is the true state of your mind and is independent of
time or place. No special circumstances or conditions are necessary nor can
real happiness be disturbed by events. To rediscover happiness while living in
the world of separation, is not possible unless you are fulfilling your
function here. Forgiveness is your function in a world where Love is denied,
assigned you by God through the Holy Spirit, Whose function it is to teach you
yours and help you fulfill it. Happiness is not possible without the commitment
to Love; forgiveness is the demonstration and the expression of that
commitment. In this world, all is Love or the call for Love. Your
responsibility is to give Love always. 

## Teacher of God
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Nowhere in the world is there reason to fear or to respond with anything less
than Love. Your response is always based on what you think you are. This holds
true for all times and all circumstances. If you think you are a body, housing
a 'person' separate and different from everyone and everything, your responses
to what arises in your life and mind will vary greatly. Variable response is
the sign of an uncertain mind, unsure of itself and its course of action. The
mind that sees itself under constant threat due to the apparent fragility of
its self identity, cannot respond in a consistent manner. Consistency requires
understanding and clarity, traits lacking in a mind riddled with fear. Those
who identify with weakness will always suffer from the constant influence of
fear, and their decision making will be distorted accordingly. What you think
you are is the thought system that is the basis of your responses to yourself
and the world around you. And you will project your beliefs onto the world you
see which will then reflect them back, perception being always a reflection of
what you want to be true. 

Into this confused and uncertain situation come the Teachers of God to bring
clarity and healing. Their task is to teach another way of thinking, living,
and understanding. They do this in the simplest and most direct way possible
through demonstration. By what they do and how they do it, what they say, how
they treat all others with whom they come into contact, they demonstrate
another way to live in all respects. Love, kindness, and non-judgment do they
bring to all areas of life and everyone they meet. Unfailingly gentle, they
show forth the strength that is gentleness and the patience that never fails. 

The example set by the Teachers of God is not missed by those around them.
Although they do not preach, their actions speak louder than words. A way of
living is shown the children of separation, one that is the opposite of the
worldly life in every respect. Their words are given to those who would hear
them, their help and goodwill is given to all. The Teachers of God need not be
concerned about what to say or what to do. Their mind is joined with the
Teacher of Teachers; from Him, they receive their guidance in all things. The
words they need are given them. What to do, the tasks of the day, are likewise
given, and they receive all help they need to complete what is assigned to
them. Nowhere is there any room for error unless they forget from Whom comes
their strength and help. And then they remember again, and all errors are
corrected and the consequences undone.

The Teachers of God rest content in the readiness to receive the gifts God has
given them. Their trust allows the Holy Spirit to guide them in all they do and
say. Their thoughts are given over to Love; what is not love is given over to
correction. The Teachers of God know that everything that happens, whether
within or without, is either Love or a call for Love. Their function is
therefore very simple. They give Love to all and everyone and everything
without exception. To what is Love they join, to the call for Love they respond
with Love. Always do they answer the call for Love, and always do they let
their answer be guided. A smile, a kind word, a helping hand, the form changes
to fit the need but always is the content the same. A call for Love is
recognized, and Love is given in the form most helpful. 

No matter what happens, your responsibility is to respond with Love,
forgiveness, and a willingness to help. There is no other way for a Teacher of
God to live than in this manner. When once you accept that role, you accept
responsibility for the world and everything in it. Your brothers need your help
to recognize Truth and the way that leads to It. They call to you, asking you
constantly to lead them out of hell, to help them see the cause of their
suffering and the solution. You begin to help by seeing the one Light in your
brother that also shines in you. Through your forgiveness of your brother and
the world, you cease to lay upon them the burden of your guilt. By granting
this freedom is it also given you. As your guilt is healed, so will all others
appear guiltless in your eyes. Only the guilty condemn others for what they
think they have done. The mind healed of guilt sees only the innocence of God's
Son wherever it looks. 

The task of the Teacher of God is to be helpful to all, giving help wherever it
is needed. To this task we dedicate each day, resting in our willingness to
learn the lessons the day brings. Through learning the day's lessons you are
healed, and you are never healed alone. All the brothers with whom and through
whom your healing takes place, are healed along with you. All you meet or see
or chance upon over the course of the day will likewise benefit. No one is
omitted, for healing is always given for all. Being aware of this fact, you
rest in the certainty that whatever you do is done for the good of all, when
you speak and act as you are guided. 

Without the Teachers of God, there would be no salvation. They give form to the
lessons the Holy Spirit teaches. For those as yet unable to turn to Him for
help, they represent Him, offering His help in a form that can be recognized.
There is nothing they cannot do; their trust and willingness given to the Holy
Spirit makes all miracles possible. They offer miracles to all they look upon,
one for every problem that appears. In their company, all tears are replaced
with happy laughter, all sadness with gratitude and joy. 

## Miracles
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Do not underestimate the extent to which miracles can change your life and set
your feet on the path to God. Their purpose is to demonstrate to those lost in
the darkness of the dream that there is a higher law, a law that supersedes the
'laws' of the dream. The miracle provides you with a means to correct all
erroneous perception, and replace it with right understanding. As stated in A
Course in Miracles, miracles wait in shining silence behind all problems you
think you have. Let the miracle correct everything in your mind that stands
between you and God. Its purpose is to bring you back to your Father through
the demonstration you are under no laws but His. As an expression of Love, the
miracle blesses giver and receiver. As corrector of perception, it demonstrates
that nothing you perceive is what you think. Through its function of collapsing
time, the miracle shows you that time is not real, that you are not a prisoner
in a world of time. 

Let miracles into your life through the acceptance of the One who brings them,
the Holy Spirit. He will teach you all you need to know to allow miracles to
transform life and perception. Miracle mindedness must be established in your
mind to take the place of the fear that formerly ruled. When fear is replaced
by miracles, Love will return to transform the mind. Do not keep It waiting;
give your assent to the healing power of the miracle that Love may re­claim
your life. Love, forgiveness, miracles, healing; these are but different names
for the return of sanity and freedom. 

Miracles are always available when your mind has been made ready to receive
them. The Holy Spirit is the inspiration for miracles. He teaches you the
conditions that must be met for miracles to be present in your life. Miracles
are completely natural events. When they do not occur, something is wrong. In
the human condition, miracles are not recognized or generally experienced, as
the density of the mind of separation excludes the possibility of miracles.
Miracles are expressions of Love; thus they bless the giver and receiver
equally. If you would receive the power of miracles into your life, you must
reach a state of miracle mindedness. This requires faith, faith in the unseen,
faith in the Holy Spirit. He makes miracles available to you if you ask
sincerely with an open mind and a pure heart. True forgiveness is itself a
miracle that blesses giver and receiver. 

Let all help be given you that you may be able to help those sent to you for
healing. You are never healed alone; healing is for all and must be shared to
be received. Do not refuse your brothers' pleas for help. They call to you to
lead them out of darkness. Would you refuse to answer when you hold the key to
deliverance in your hand? Alone, you are as helpless as they; joined with your
brother, is all power given to you both. Joining in Love and shared purpose,
together you walk the road back to God as the gates of Heaven open wide to
receive you. No one enters Heaven except hand in hand with their brothers.
Alone, the gate is barred by your own decision; the state of alone­ness,
separation from all others, is the denial of Heaven. In Heaven all souls are
joined in a Oneness without beginning or end. 

## Love Always
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Do not let the fear inherent in the state of separation, cast its dark shadow
across the whole of your life. No part of human life is unaffected by the fear
lying hidden in the mind. Thought, feeling, and perception; all are distorted
and fragmented by unconscious fear. Human motivation is often driven by fear
though it is usually not apparent. The different forms fear may take, the
unawareness of its presence and influence, the dissociation from what you have
suppressed, often hide from you the source of the motivation that drives your
actions. 

Love is a much better motivator than fear which replaced Love after the
separation. Love's motivation brings us together for the good of all. Fear
divides us, with each staking out his tiny kingdom and erecting thick walls for
its defense. Love would break down all barriers that separate, and bring
together its children into one big and happy family. Fear fragments the family
of God, bringing chaos and conflict into all relations. Love only gives, and
fear only takes away. 

Always respond with Love no matter what occurs, and only good will come for
all. To bring fear to any situation is to fragment and separate. Conflict then
inevitably results. When Love is all you want to give, then Love is all you
will receive. Never is there any need for anything short of Love, for Love is
all there is. Everything that is not Love, is but part of a dream wherein you
have lost yourself for a moment. Only Love exists; God is Love, and you are
Love as you were created. Nothing God did not create exists at all. Fear,
guilt, and the mad world that arose from them are imagination, shadows in the
clouds that obscure your vision, nothing else. A nightmare still trapped in
your mem­ory and experienced as if here and now. It will not prevail against
Love. 

## The End of the Dream
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Now is the time to relinquish all nightmares, letting the Light shine through,
dispelling the darkness. They no longer interest you; you have had enough
suffering, enough pain and disappointment. Too much time has been wasted in
idle pursuits that go nowhere and accomplish nothing. What is there to gain in
a world where chaos rules and shadows play at being real? Abandon this madness
before it drags you down once again to play the game of death, a game where
only loss rises to meet you. The dream will end when you finally tire of it,
not before. Learn to face its conditions honestly, let go of denial and
dissociation. Remember the glorious Reality that waits for you beyond the
dream. Remember your Father Who calls to you unceasingly. And remember the Holy
Spirit, Whose care and concern for you are unceasing, Who guides you along the
path He has chosen for you. The Holy Spirit will take you to the gates of
Heaven. Give Him your complete trust, thereby do you learn to trust your Self. 

In the discarding of all that is untrue, you will find the Truth. Your mind is
filled with false ideas about yourself and the world. From this arises the
partial perception and limited experiences of separation that characterize the
sleeping mind. The Self has not left your mind; the Self is your mind, your
real Mind. Only the configuration of your mind in a state of self invented
illusion, based on attack and defense, conceals the Truth that still abides
deep in your awareness. Hence you need not search for Truth outside your mind
nor struggle to find It within. 

What is needed is two-fold: become aware of illusion in all its forms and all
its operations, and learn the difference between Truth and illusion thoroughly.
The Holy Spirit guides this process, teaching you true perception and bringing
you to genuine understanding. Without His help, you cannot break through the
illusion you have constructed to limit your mind. Withdraw your allegiance to
the world you have made, to the illusion that characterizes your ex­perience in
every way. Without your active support, illusion will collapse, and that which
it was made to conceal will shine forth. 

Do not under any circumstances forget who you are and the help that is always
available. The constant identification with the self you have made, and the
operant belief that you are alone and must find your own understanding and
solution to the problems you face, keep you frozen as the illusory self.
Illusory beliefs must be raised to question and carefully examined. Willingness
to let them go, to learn another way of being, of thinking and perceiving, must
be cultivated and allowed to strengthen. All falsity must be honestly
recognized and let go. This happens day by day, hour by hour, minute by minute,
as you become frequently, even continually, aware of the content and activity
of your mind. The process of letting go, of choosing again, is crucial. The
false, the past, the illusion, must be chosen against in the present, in its
activity and operation. Constant vigilance must be practiced for the mind is
constantly active. The mind is continuing the past, the habitual, through its
activity, or it is being corrected and directed towards freedom and Truth.
There is nothing in between these two choices. 

## The Past
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Do not allow the past in the form of habits and tendencies to continue its
domination of your mind. You gain nothing by doing so. The same problems and
misery will continue unabated until you learn to change your mind, to choose
again over and over throughout the day, and set your life on a different
course. The ego is firmly established in the past which is its home. The past
is your home too until you recognize it for what it is and open your mind to
the recognition of your true home. The ego's home is a prison with gaily
colored walls and bars concealed behind the promises it holds out; a hollow
shell that houses only death. Leave the dead and rejoin the living. You were
never meant to inhabit the house of death. 

You are life itself, eternal, joyous and free. You will return to your natural
and authentic state. This has never been in doubt; God's Will assures your
return. This can happen sooner or later according to your decision, for you
alone determine the conditions of your life. They may appear to be due to
outside forces, forces that lie beyond your control, but this is not true. You
are the dreamer of the dream; you are responsible for what happens, you alone.
You choose the feelings and thoughts you would express, and decide on the goal
you would achieve. Do not waste time on goals that rise up before you like
mirages, receding always just beyond reach. If you should attain such a goal,
you find always you are holding nothingness; like sand it slips through your
fingers. Choose the one goal that is possible to reach for it is always here
and now. Salvation is yours any moment you truly want it. The Holy Instant is
always available, waiting for you to let go the past and return to the present,
to Love. 

Whenever you let the past go completely, the present can be born anew, free of
distortion and limitation. The ego represents the past; the ego is the past,
the memory of all that has gone before. All the hurts, fears, slights,
pleasures, and pains of a world born of separation from God, are carried by the
ego and laid upon the present. You cannot truly experience now while carrying
the burden of the past and perceiving through its distorted vision. Lay down
all burdens, all memories of the past, and greet the present with empty hands,
an open mind and a loving heart. Love is found only in the present for Love,
like all Truth, is not of time. 

The body's eyes see only the past, appearing as if it were happening now. A
world imagined is what you look upon, a projection of your mind, a memory of
what is over and gone. It lives on in your mind, out-pictured as if it were
here still, that you may learn the lessons needed to take you to the end of
learning where all memories end, leaving only Truth in their stead. Do not lose
yourself in dreams by forgetting their purpose. Everything that happens in the
world of separation has a higher purpose if you let it be revealed. The Holy
Spirit uses all events, situations, relationships, and circumstances, to teach
you what you are. There is nothing that occurs that He cannot use to guide you
towards freedom and the end of suffering. Never is the form important in and of
itself; it is the lesson it brings, the content, that you must learn to
recognize. 

Do let the Holy Spirit teach you the difference between Truth and illusion,
Love and fear. You constantly mistake one for the other and have paid dearly
for this error. You must learn to perceive with absolute clarity the Truth
behind all illusion, all forms, and call It forth to witness. The bewildering
variety of appearances and circumstances, the constantly changing parade of
thoughts and images, the unpredictable moods and feelings that come and go; all
the change going on within and without serve to confuse and absorb the mind,
concealing the changeless Reality from your awareness. 

You must learn to look past form and variation and find the changeless within
the constantly changing. This cannot be done without the help of the Holy
Spirit Who overlooks all illusion, seeing only the changeless. He will give you
His vision when you are ready to join your mind with His. True vision will show
you the Truth reflected everywhere in everything. Love, Light, and Unity,
everywhere, embracing everything. 

## Forgiveness and Unity
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Forgiveness will take you to the Unity that underlies the world of separation.
The refusal to forgive, to love, maintains and reinforces separation, and keeps
the belief in attack inviolate. What else but the release of what affirms
separation and denies Unity could open the way for Its return? Into this open
mind comes forgiveness, the affirmation of Truth. Forgiveness leads you to the
recognition of your Oneness with the world and everything in it. The mind that
forgives, that takes complete responsibility for all that happens without the
need to project guilt and blame, has accepted all things as part of itself. In
recognition and acceptance of the One Unity, you are set free to be your Self. 

Without loving kindness, life becomes harsh and joyless. The unloving suffer
from a sense of deep guilt that is projected onto their brothers, thus further
strengthening the belief in guilt. To escape the belief of their unworthiness
and the deep sense of guilt, they must engage in frantic activity, which keeps
the mind diverted and strengthens the tendency to dissociate from the content
of consciousness that arouses fear. As long as this is done however, that from
which you dissociate remains in the mind, exerting its influence in many ways.
All the content of consciousness, whether you are aware of it or not, affects
the mind and the behavior that arises from it. Do not try to change be­havior
without changing the beliefs that elicit and shape it. 

## The Mind
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

All starts with the mind. Your awareness and its contents are your experience.
Perception, emotion, feelings, thoughts, all take place in awareness, in
consciousness. The world you see that appears as if outside of you, is like
everything else in your mind. It has no reality apart from what you have given
it. That this is not apparent is the result of a decision you have made to be
separate from your Creator and your Self as He created It. There is no
separa­tion without form; thus a world was imagined, populated by many separate
forms that move about, each with its own history and purpose. 

You were created as Mind; even now Mind is what you are. All form is but image,
projected and appearing as if outside of you. There is nothing outside of you.
As you were created, you are whole, containing everything within you. Every
mind contains all minds for all mind is One. Each contains and is the Whole. 

Your mind is where a transformation must take place, nowhere else. There is
nowhere else. In Truth, salvation, which is awakening, is not a change at all
but a lifting, a clearing out of all that clouds your mind. Salvation is the
return to awareness of what you are now and have always been. Driven from
awareness by the wish to be as you are not, Truth merely waits until you are
willing to welcome It again. Your experience of yourself and the world is
trans­formed by awakening from your long sleep of forgetfulness. Until that
blessed day, be vigilant for Truth and the Kingdom, remembering always your
holy purpose. 

## What You Must Do
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Do not look back and dwell on what you have done but look instead at what you
must do. There is much to be learned, much to be undone, in order for freedom
to be restored. Each day, and each experience of each day, is an opportunity to
learn the lessons the Holy Spirit teaches and unlearn what is taught by the
ego. Patiently, step by step, you retrace the steps you took in the descent
into separation, undoing each in turn. When all are undone, your Father will
take the last step, and you will return to the Kingdom forever. 

There are many journeys you may take in the dream of separation, all leading
nowhere but for one: the journey back to God. In truth, it is not a journey at
all for you have never left God's Mind, yet in this world does it seem to be a
journey whose destination waits in some far off future time. And journey you
must as all are destined to return; of that there is no doubt. Only in time
does the outcome seem uncertain and time itself is an illusion. Do not rest
content with some future idea of salvation. Salvation is always now and now
only. Neither in the future nor in the past will you find Truth; Truth is not
remembered or imagined but is directly experienced as what you are now. How and
when you attain It is but part of the dream. You have always been the Christ,
the Holy Creation of God, and forever so will you remain. 

To refuse to do what is asked of you by the Holy Spirit, is to refuse to act in
your own best interest. The mind asleep does not know what is in its highest
interest. You do not recognize what will bring you pain, for you cannot
distinguish between pain and pleasure, often confusing one for the other. The
search for security, which dominates human life in the world of dreams, is a
futile attempt to deny the insecurity inherent in life as a bodily identity.
Living as a fragile body in a world of constant change, of rapidly shifting
circumstances and conditions, constantly arouses a sense of threat, of danger.
The search for security, the erection of defenses, the attempt to control the
present and maintain stability into an unknown future; all these are the
response of the ego to what it perceives but does not understand. If you
continue to see the world through the ego's eyes, you will remain a prisoner to
its misperceptions and wrong understanding. Your security cannot be found where
there is none, or in a state of identifying with what you are not. All that you
will find in an illusory world is the continuation of fear, pain, conflict,
suffering and death. 

Do not let the mistaken beliefs of the past continue to dominate and shape your
life. Turn to the One Who shows you the way to Truth and freedom. With your
consent, He will take you there. The only thing you need remember is that you
know nothing. This thought, kept clearly in mind, will serve as a reminder to
let go all old ideas and beliefs, and open your mind to learn what the Holy
Spirit teaches. The mind must be emptied of the old, of the past, to be ready
to welcome the new. The Holy Spirit teaches you to recognize all that you have
learned is meaningless. With that realization firmly established, and your mind
empty and open to receive the new, learning will inevitably follow. 

## Learning and Experience
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Learning that is not of this world is something entirely new. It is not just a
replacing of the old beliefs you have carried so long with new ideas. New ideas
must point to, must represent, experience that is not of this world. This
experience is what the learning of the Holy Spirit's thought system will lead
you to; experience that takes place in the world of separation, but Whose
Source is beyond. What is beyond will remain beyond; It is reflected here for
those willing to perceive It. Through the wholeness of perception, and a
consistent and uncompromising commitment to forgive, the Love, Light, and Unity
of Heaven are reflected in the dream. The real world is the new home of those
whose feet still walk the earth, but whose minds have reached the gates of
Heaven. 

To do what must be done may seem difficult at first due to the egoic
resistance. You have been long accustomed to devoting your time and energy to
remaining asleep. You have worked very hard to make the meaningless meaningful,
to find value in what is valueless, and to avoid the Truth that lies as if
buried deep within you. All of your life has been a movement away from the
Self. Now you must turn around and begin the journey that leads in another
direction. You must move towards Truth and not away from It. This requires a
training of the mind, the mind that is fundamentally undisciplined, at the
mercy of its unconscious fears and desires. Confusion, unclarity, and conflict,
are the hallmarks of an untrained mind. To undo, to correct the false and
meaningless thought system of separation, everything you have believed and the
mental habits and tendencies that are part of it, is indeed a daunting task.
Remember Who goes with you every step of the way. 

Just when you need help, it is given, not before. All things are done when and
as needed. Let all things be given, let all be revealed. There is One Who knows
all, Who guides you always. Accept the plans He gives you in place of your own;
His will work, yours will not. There is no reason to doubt His knowledge and
beneficence. He will never desert you or you Him. You may delay and resist,
postpone the final reckoning; you cannot stop it or avoid it for­ever. Your
Father wills that you return to Him; what He wills is already true. You but
wait for the recognition of that fact to reach your mind. God does not wait on
time. In truth, neither do you. 

Do you know the way you must follow? Are you aware of what needs be done, and
how? To admit you do not know opens the mind to receive the necessary guidance.
To recognize your ignorance is the prerequisite for knowledge to return. Learn
to remember always, at all times and in all situations, that you are not alone.
Do not try to understand anything in isolation, by yourself. Nothing is
understood alone; always your understanding is shaped by the thought system to
which you adhere and the guide you thus choose. Learn to remember to ask
always, at all times, the Guide your Father has given you to help you
understand. Let Him guide your thoughts, words, and ac­tions, that you may
become a Light unto your brothers, a lamp to shine the Light on the way they
too must follow. You listen to the Holy Spirit not for yourself alone; all that
you are given is to be shared with your brothers. 

## A New Life
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

To teach you how to recognize what is necessary and what is not, what is
helpful to the accomplishment of your single purpose and what hinders and
obstructs it, is the purpose of this teaching. To that end, you are being
guided by both the words before you and the intent from which they arise. Words
do not only carry meaning, they give form to intent. I am asking you to join
with me and all your brothers who have accepted our part in God's Great Plan of
Atonement. We need your help. Each and every one of you has an important part
to play. The Great Plan is not complete until everyone has accepted their part
and completed it. 

You can delay as long as you want, wander down a thousand dark alleys that go
nowhere, keep yourself endlessly busy doing nothing. Sooner or later you will
have had enough of suffering; your pain threshold will be reached. Not until
then will many of you be willing to look for another way to live, a real
solution to conflict, pain, and suffering. A solution that carries you beyond
their reach forever. And some will recognize the Light that calls to them and
respond, recognizing that conflict and suffering are unnecessary, thus
shortening their journey immeasurably. Do not wait my brothers, do not delay.
All delay is a needless prolonging of fear and misery. Do not resist the
inevitable return of freedom and Love. Do not cling to fear and suffering as
the basis of your life. You never wanted this; you have been dreaming a dream
of forgetfulness. Surrounded by dream figures, you have forgotten who you are
for a moment. Now is the time to let the memory of what you are return to your
awareness, transforming your life and returning you to the Kingdom. Now, only
now. 

Begin a new life this very day, a life dedicated to Love and Truth. Leave fear
and conflict behind. They will wither away as you withdraw your interest and
belief that you gained something thereby. Life itself awaits you. What you have
been experiencing as life is a pale shadow, a sickly distortion of what you are
meant to be. Fear not you will be asked to give up what is near and dear to
you. What you value so highly has come at the expense of everything that has
real value, and has never brought you anything but loss and sorrow. No real
sacrifice is asked of you. Can it be a sacrifice to give up what is meaningless
and valueless? You are merely asked to lay aside the cause of pain and
suffering, and accept peace, freedom, and Love in its place. Can that be a
difficult choice to make? Any difficulty around this choice is but the
resistance to see what you have valued so long for what it really is. 

Do not wait any longer in the vain hope you will find fulfillment and peace of
mind in a world that lacks both. There is too much to be done to waste time in
vain imaginings. Take up the thread of spiritual life, turn over decision
making to the One Whose function it is, and learn of Him what must be done. Let
go the empty conceit that you know anything of value. Let your mind be emptied
of all that came before, of all that is past. Learn to greet each present
moment, each new day, with a happy mind and an open heart. Be ready to listen
and willing to learn always. And above all, let peace and forgiveness be your
gift to everyone you meet. 

## Do Not Be Concerned
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

What is the next step to take after your mind has been reoriented and turned
towards Truth? You must begin to understand what is required of you, what is
needed for salvation. Certain changes must take place in your mind. This
purification cannot be avoided. Purification may be described as the emptying
out of your mind and heart of all that is false; the beliefs, ideas, and the
habits of thought, feeling, and action that characterize the mind
self-identified as an ego occupying a body. This process is direct and
constant, requiring a total commitment on your part to be completed. Love and
forgiveness must replace fear and guilt, and all need to attack and defend must
be relinquished. Only then can you discover where your real safety lies. Only
then do you become capable of welcoming Truth as it is. 

Do not be concerned if at times you seem to falter, if your dedication wavers.
This is a natural part of the process, for you are learning to accept and trust
a new Teacher while still operating from the lessons you learned in the past.
This back and forth, this movement in fits and starts, will usually
characterize your journey until you began to see unequivocally the real value
of what is true, and the actual suffering that results from every choice for
illusion. You have not been completely aware of the consequences of all
thinking, feeling, and action that arises from fear, from egoic motivation. In
fact, you have not been aware of how deeply fear pervades your mind and
influences your life. The mind in separation must dissociate from the fear and
guilt at its core in order to function at all. Yet it will not allow them to be
healed, for they are the basis of separation and the world you see. 

It is essential that you become completely aware of the condition you are in,
of how you would feel if your true state were not disguised by dissociation and
denial. The habitual and unconscious actions of your mind keep the ego's
control in place. In fact, they are part of the ego's solution to separation, a
solution that is no solution at all, but rather a temporary escape that lessens
anxiety just enough to keep you going as its host. Fear must be avoided and
controlled, but never completely released, or you would not need the ego as
your guide and teacher. Without fear and guilt, Love would arise to your
awareness, and the memory of God would not be far behind. 

Do not give up hope ever. Do not be discouraged. The way may seem long and
hard, the road stretching out before you to the far horizon, but you are not
alone. Your Guide and Teacher goes with you, angels are your constant
companions. The holy instant is available at every moment to lift you out of
this world, giving you a taste of Heaven. Patience, infinite patience, is
needed as long as you still journey through time. Yet time is illusion; Truth
is never absent. Do not forget what awaits when you reach the gates of Heaven:
a glorious homecoming, a celebration of the return of Light and Love and
freedom. Nothing you have experienced in this world can even faintly compare
with that bright moment.

