---
ref: "Chapter Thirteen"
title: "The Way to Heaven"
---

Here is the way to Heaven, the state of Unity you once knew and will know
again: surrender, patience, unwavering trust, perseverance, and constant
willingness. These qualities, these capacities, must be developed to transform
the way you live now. They must be applied to the process of returning to
Truth, and withdrawn from their dedication to upholding illusion. Until now,
your faith in the ego has been unwavering and consistent. Likewise your
perseverance in following the ego’s goals and accepting its interpretation of
the world you see. This has only hurt you, and has given you a few paltry
rewards that are fleeting and meaningless.

Surrender is essential in spiritual life. The ego bound personality is
accustomed to living the way it chooses and making its own decisions, or so it
thinks. In actuality, no decisions are made on your own. Every decision is made
in concert with the guide you have chosen. There are only two, and of these
two, only one guides your decisions so as to strengthen you and lead you away
from pain. The decisions you think are made on your own, are always determined
by the understanding and value system of the ego. Their purpose is to maintain
separation and fear, and keep egoic defenses intact. 

There is no more effective way to begin to free yourself from the egoic
misidentification and its consequences than to turn over decision making to the
Holy Spirit. This is what is meant by surrender. You have relied on the ego as
your guide and identity for too long, and it has cost you dearly. The most
effective way to withdraw your allegiance is to turn your life over to the
Guide God has given you. He will not fail to lead you out of the trap you have
made and back to freedom in God.

Can you surrender to the Higher Power is the important question? You do not
realize you have already surrendered your life to an alien will not your own.
You seem to be an independent entity, capable of making your own decisions
based on the exercise of ‘good’ judgment. Your cherished right to decide for
yourself is jealously guarded and protected from the infringement of other
egos. Yet all along, while you are making decisions supposedly in your own self
interest, you are actually supporting the ego’s interests rather than your own.
Due to the fundamental confusion of identity, you do not realize they are not
the same.

You are not the ego though it lives in your mind as a part of your mind. You
invited it in as a solution to the overwhelming fear arising from the first
experience of separation. The ego is the belief in separation; inviting it into
your mind to become part of you made separation ‘real’, and led to the further
development of separation until the world you see arose. Your true identity was
lost to you though it never left your mind. Yet is it buried so deep in your
mind, you cannot remember or reach it without help. 

The Holy Spirit has the function of restoring the awareness of your true
identity, the Self, the Christ. This is not difficult to do if He has your full
cooperation. However, full cooperation takes time to develop in most cases;
this delays the successful completion of the learning process. Once the
decision is made for God, for Truth, and the recognition of its inestimable
value dawns on your awareness, the end is certain. Do not delay my brother. Do
not hesitate to make the only decision that can be made. 

Salvation, or spiritual awakening, is the only purpose you can pursue that will
lead to a truly beneficial outcome for you and all your brothers. Everything
that supports this purpose will only help, and all that does not will only
delay. The means given you through this teaching is the practice of
forgiveness, and a conscious relationship with the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit
is a part of every mind, but how many are aware of this? And of those, how many
actively pursue the establishment of clear and consistent communication with
Him? He is always with you, waiting for your willingness to accept His help.
Whether to make use of it or not is your decision. Always is He willing and
able. Are you? 

Please do not turn your back on salvation when once you become aware of it and
what it brings you. You will not find happiness here, you will not. You may
continue to seek it where it is not, but you will find only frustration and
disappointment. All things of this world will pass away, all accomplishments
and honors will become as ashes, leaving only their bitter taste in the end. 

You have heard it said, “Patience is a virtue.” Patience is more than a virtue;
it is a necessity for patience is a part of surrender. To be patient is to
forgo demands on the present, on anyone or anything. Patience does not try to
control what happens or force possible outcomes to be achieved into a timetable
of its choosing. The ego mind is always trying to reach its goals according to
its idea of time. Time is used to get as much as possible as quickly as
possible. The ego tries to use time in its own way regardless of the wishes of
others. It sees time much as it sees everything else, as a limited quantity
that it must control in order to meet its perceived needs. Under the ego’s
influence, you are always rushing through time, never present here and now. 

To be aware in the present requires the exercise of patience. The mind must be
checked in its headlong flight through time, not by opposition but by relaxing
in the present, by slowing down its race to the future. Release of the inner
tension must be achieved, that the mind may become capable of being quiet and
present. You must give up the need to force outcomes or set timetables for
results; in other words, you must develop patience. As is stated in A Course in
Miracles, “Infinite patience brings immediate results.” The patient mind has
surrendered the egoic preoccupation with the future that prevents it from
experiencing itself as it is now. 

A quiet mind, resting in the present, is ready and open to receive Truth. Truth
cannot enter a mind that is busy, driven to distraction, filled with its own
ideas and goals. In such a mind, there is no room for Truth nor would It be
welcome, for the restless, constantly active mind is interested only in itself,
its needs and wants. Virtually all spiritual practices aim to achieve just this
quietness of mind that is the condition in which Truth can be experienced.
Patience is a part of preparation, a quality of mind that must be developed,
that awareness be able to rest quietly in the present. Patience rests on
surrender and deepens it until they become one.

There is no place in the ego mind where the din of constant activity is not
heard. Do not allow this clamor to drown out the voice of reason. The still,
small voice of Truth cannot be heard through the continuous noise that fills
your mind. To hear this voice again, the desire for constant escape from the
present must be recognized and given up. Then and then only, when all activity
has ceased and the mind relaxed and quiet, will the Voice for God be heard. The
Holy Spirit has spoken to you since time began, and He will continue to speak
until time is over. Do not fail to listen; His is the voice that will lead you
to freedom. Leave the shrill voice of the ego, the guide to fear, and follow
the Teacher God has given you to bring you home. 

Now is the time to begin the journey that will lead you out of the world you
have made, beyond all pain, suffering, and sorrow, to the very gates of Heaven.
You have a Guide Who will not fail you; the only question is one of time. You
will leave time and all it entails and return to God. When that moment comes is
your decision and yours only. The Holy Spirit will take you there, but He
cannot decide for you. Just as you decided for separation long ago, you must
decide for Unity now; nothing that happens to God’s Son comes but by His
decision. This world was born of judgment; lay judgment down and you are free.
Separation was the result of a choice for fear and the denial of Love. Renounce
fear in all its forms big or small, and Love will return to heal your mind of
all the consequences of what never was. Take off the mask you have worn since
time began to hide the face of Christ. Release the self you have made back into
the nothingness from which it came, and step into the Light so bright It
illuminates the universe. Now is the time, only now. Do not delay. 

All goals deemed attainable are reached through means in which you place your
trust. Even the belief that a goal is attainable is a statement of trust. You
will not set a course towards anything you desire unless trust is invested in
the means and the attainability of your purpose. If you are investing worldly
means and goals with trust, if you are trusting the guide you have made, the
ego, a guide who knows nothing and leads you nowhere, how much more does the
Guide given you by God deserve your trust and faithfulness? 

Let us consider what God has given us. He has given us a Guide Who cannot fail,
the Plan of Atonement which will bring separation to an end, and the means by
which the plan of Atonement is completed: forgiveness. All that is needed to
free ourselves from the prison of separation that we have made, has been
provided. We need only avail ourselves of the help we are given, and add to
that our own little willingness, and salvation is assured. Yet how many are
actually using what has been given them to leave suffering and separation
behind? Why the reluctance to let go of pain and fear, and turn towards joy and
Love? Surely even a child would see the desirability of such a decision. 

“Except you become as little children, you cannot enter the kingdom of Heaven,”
as stated in the Bible, is an admonition to become simple in your thinking, and
learn to trust as children do. The ego mind is heavily over conceptualized. Its
thinking is not only complicated, convoluted, and often conflicted, but it
covers over experience with a haze of concepts that further deadens and
complicates. The Truth is simple, straightforward, and easy to understand for
those who seek true understanding. Before understanding can be attained
however, the mind must be corrected and purified. Until then, the heavy clouds
of guilt, complexity, and confusion, that characterize the human mind will make
real understanding impossible. 

Understanding in the spiritual sense is not a matter of conceptualizing, of
clever argument, or reasoning based on the past. True understanding cannot be
reached by a mind that is not present or self aware. Learning as a process
relating to spiritual understanding, is an entirely different undertaking than
all learning that takes place in the worldly context. The faith required is a
part of this process, as is the surrender that follows faith. Ultimately, no
real and authentic spiritual understanding can be reached without direct
experience of what is being taught. Direct experience is not mental; it has
nothing to do with concepts, it is not mere thinking. Spiritual experience
takes place directly in consciousness without the mediation of symbols.
Spiritual experience is an entirely new kind of experience that falls entirely
outside of the ego’s sphere. You will become established in the awareness it
brings over time if you persist. This new awareness will become the freedom of
your mind; it will expand and grow until the Self reveals Itself as you. 

The trust of a child is strong, innocent, and unwavering. A child does not
question its parent’s ability to take care of it and protect it. This frees the
child from unnecessary anxiety, and leaves it free to learn what must be
learned. Your relationship with God should be like this. Know that you are safe
and taken care of always, and your mind will be free of the fear that clouds it
and makes real learning so difficult. Know that your Father, through the Holy
Spirit, knows what you need and will always provide. For every problem you
perceive, the help you need and the solution are given. If you but knew the
constant concern the Holy Spirit has for you, and His infinite Love, you would
leave all doubt and fear behind. Your trust is well placed if given to Him, and
misplaced if given to the ego. 

Trust has never been lacking in your life. You trust implicitly in the identity
you have given yourself. Your faith in sin and guilt has never been questioned,
and your trust in the defenses you have made is likewise very consistent. Yet
to trust, to have faith in what is constantly changing, is surely not
reasonable. The self you have made has a thousand different moods that can
shift instantly from one to another. The perception on which the self rests, is
marked by constant variability, a variability that can change from day to day,
even minute to minute. The same object of perception can be seen differently,
according to your mood or state of mind. Judgment, on which perception rests,
has no consistent standard other than what you consider valuable, and this too
shifts with every goal. Nothing is more unreliable and less trustworthy than
what you commonly place your trust in. 

Contrast this with the Holy Spirit, in whom your trust is well placed. He does
not depend on the erratic and uncertain process of partial perception; His
perception arises from knowledge which is wholly consistent and unchanging. He
always sees truly, perceiving only the reflection of Truth in the dream world.
And His judgment is wholly true and never varies: you are the holy Creation of
God, created in Love, as Love, forever innocent and shining in the One Light.
The Holy Spirit perceives the difference between Truth and illusion, and never
does He confuse the two. No matter the form, illusion is illusion; he overlooks
all illusion and sees the Truth that shines just beyond it, the One Light. He
understands everything that seems to happen in the world of separation is
either the expression of Love or a call for Love. Never does He perceive
anything other than these two possibilities. His response to both is always the
same; He gives Love to all always. 

There is nothing in the world to which you should give your trust. Only the
Holy Spirit, Who stands beyond the world, is worthy of your complete trust.
With His help, you too will go beyond the world of separation, back to the
Truth you left only in dreams. He will bring you to the end of dreaming if that
be your true desire. If not, He will help you, wherever you are, to turn in the
direction of Truth. No positive and helpful thought, no hint of Love that
appears in your mind ever so briefly, will go unnoticed by the Holy Spirit. He
will always respond, reinforcing every little step you are willing to take,
augmenting your little willingness with His. He cannot give you what you are
unwilling to accept. Always are your learning limits respected, though He
yearns to give you every gift of God He has been keeping for you since time
began. 

The Holy Spirit is the Teacher of teachers; all teachers of God simply
represent Him in outward form. You can have a personal relationship with the
Holy Spirit if you make the commitment, and follow it up with honest effort and
heartfelt cooperation. The cooperation that is needed is simple and
straightforward. Recognize and accept that you know not the way back to God;
you know not what is required. Remember always that you know nothing, but that
you have a Teacher Who knows everything. He knows your strengths and
weaknesses, knows how to strengthen you in every way, and bring you beyond all
weakness to the strength of Christ within you. He will shorten your journey,
and go before you to clear the way. God has given you the Answer to separation
and all the problems you seem to have, the solution to all pain and suffering.
Why would you look for another when this One Answer contains all answers? Turn
within and decide for peace. Begin the process of making all decisions with the
help of the Holy Spirit. Learn to listen to the Voice for God in your own mind,
and follow the direction you receive. 

The only way to reach God is to surrender. The egoic identity is not in a
condition of surrender to anything except its inclination to seek pleasure and
avoid pain, and its habit of projecting guilt onto others. Your belief in guilt
is not what you should base your life upon, for it brings you only pain,
conflict, and discord. Life, to be meaningful, must be based on that which is
true and good, that which helps you rise above fear and limitation. 

There is something within you that is true, soaring high above the pain and
strife of this world. The purpose of life is to find this within yourself, and
live in the Light of That. Do not seek It outside yourself, It is not there.
The Truth lives deep within you, far beyond the mind of separation, far beyond
the reach of the ego. It has vanished from your awareness long ago. Yet It has
never left the mind where it was placed by God. To reach this long buried
Truth, you need the help that comes from beyond the little circle of illusions
you have erected around your mind. 

God has given you the Answer, the One Who will lead you back to the Truth you
have always been. The most difficult thing for you to do, and indeed the only
thing you must do, is to learn to surrender. From true surrender, comes all the
qualities, the capacities needed to awaken from the dream. Your mind must be
purified, freed from all the falsity that characterizes and dominates it. The
Great Plan of Atonement is an undoing, an unraveling and emptying of the
delusory mind of separation. Your mind must become clear, quiet, and empty,
freed from its dependence on the past that Truth may find welcome. Only if
welcomed without resistance or reservation will It return to your awareness.
You need not seek for It; you need only become aware of everything in your mind
that denies and opposes Truth, and give it over to be undone. 

Do not delay or resist what is inevitable. Everyone without exception will
return to God. God’s Will, which is also your true will, will be done. The
longer you live in the condition of separation from God and the Self, the more
suffering you will have to endure. There is no substitute for Truth. Always you
have tried to find what can take Its place, and always you have failed. Why go
on trying to find what does not exist? Illusion will not satisfy you no matter
how attractive the form or temporarily gratifying the experience. All form, all
experience, passes away in the end, leaving nothing behind but fading memories
and shattered hopes. And death waits for all who come here for that is why they
came: to prove death victor over life and the ego victor over God. This is
madness plain and simple, and never will it bring you anything but pain and
suffering. 

You do not need to continue as you have always done since time began. You can
change your mind about who you are and the purpose of your life. All the help
you need will be provided if you decide for Truth. God’s grace is always
available, but you must be willing to receive. Effort is needed on the road to
Truth. You have exerted yourself with all your might to maintain and defend
separation. Now you must engage in the effort to bring about its end. You are
not alone in this task; mighty companions will be given you, the Holy Spirit
will help and guide you in all things, the Truth within will draw you into
Itself. Success is assured if you are willing to surrender, trust, persevere,
and cooperate with the help that is given, the guidance that is received. 

Whatever the cost of freedom, are you willing to pay it? The price that must be
paid is nothing less than all you hold dear, for what you cling to so
tenaciously has enslaved your mind. The state of separation is a self imposed
state of limitation and bondage. Bondage to what is not true, what has only
hurt you. What you value, what establishes the basis of your life, has robbed
you of your freedom. Yet are you a willing victim, for you choose what you
value and decide upon the means of attaining or keeping it. No one outside of
your mind has deprived you of anything. You have voluntarily chosen illusion in
place of Truth, fear in place of Love, and limitation in place of freedom. You
can just as well choose again, and you must if you would be free. 

The belief in sin and guilt is the foundation of the ego’s entire thought
system. From this arises projection, judgment, the need to defend and attack,
and the misuse of all relationships. To the ego, all relationships have the
purpose of keeping guilt alive and separation unquestioned. All relationships
must be limited, tightly controlled, and based on what you can get from them.
The giving they require is always a kind of exchange, a bargaining in which you
decide how much you will give for what you get. Love, if It enters at all, is
present in an incomplete and distorted form, and is used as one of the
bargaining chips by which each of you decides the value of what you exchange. 

A holy relationship is the opposite of the ego’s relationships in every way.
Its purpose, given it by the Holy Spirit, is to bring an end to guilt and
replace it with Love. It does this by joining rather than maintaining
separation, by learning to see the other as innocent, which is to see your
brother as he truly is. A holy relationship has the goal of bringing Truth into
both your minds that Heaven be restored to you. It has no other goal than this,
for there is no other goal worthy of you. In the holy relationship, you learn
to give without concern for what you get. The emphasis on exchange, so
characteristic of the ego, is absent. Love only gives, It does not exchange for
It already has everything. The inclusion of Love and the purpose of Truth will
establish holiness rather than guilt as the foundation of your relationship.
The holiness which you look for and see in your brother, will restore you to
the Kingdom and bring Heaven to earth. The ego will not prevail against the
will to unite in Love. 

Nowhere in this world will you see the results of your actions as clearly as in
a holy relationship. Its transformative power is literally limitless in its
capability to restore Truth to your awareness. Recognizing that your brothers
interest and yours are one and the same, releases the healing power of the
miracle into both your lives. The holiness of your relationship will spread
until it covers your whole life, bringing all of your relationships to Love.
When Love is the purpose and foundation of all you do, life will become an
expression of holiness in action, and you will offer only God’s Blessings to
all. 

In all you do that you value, in learning what you want to learn, you
demonstrate perseverance. Very little can be accomplished unless you persevere.
To learn what you must learn to replace illusion with Truth, requires great
perseverance exercised over a long period of time. The undoing of your mind,
the false mind of separation, requires constant dedication to a single purpose.
This purpose must become the guiding Light that illumines your entire life,
clarifying all the factors of existence, putting everything in proper
perspective. There is not your spiritual purpose and your other purposes to
which you also give time and attention; there is only your one true purpose and
the relationship of all parts of your life with that purpose. Eventually,
everything you think, do, or say, must be evaluated in relation to Truth. Does
it support your journey back to God, or does it hinder you?

Ultimately, you cannot avoid the necessity to make an uncompromising decision
for Truth if you would awaken from the dream of suffering and death. No
compromise is possible between Truth and illusion, between God and the ego. You
are always choosing one or the other with every thought, word, and action. The
uncompromising commitment to awakening must be an active one, for you are
called upon to choose the Self or the ego a thousand times a day. The
perseverance required is way beyond what is needed to accomplish worldly goals.
The goal itself, to realize the Self that is your true nature, is of
immeasurably greater value than any worldly accomplishment. Whatever you
accomplish in the worldly sense, no matter how seemingly glorious or worthwhile
at the time, will pass away. Illusions do not last no matter how stable they
may appear for a little while. All things in the world of separation are
temporary, ephemeral, and destined to return to dust. 

Even the body, your most prized possession, is temporary and subject to decay,
disease, and death. No goal whose purpose centers on the body, is anything but
a fleeting memory in time. Your life does not depend on the body, nor does it
begin or end there. Life is One, and all who live share that One Life with God.
He is the Creator of all that is real; what He created not does not exist. The
body is your invention, made to be the symbol of separation, the 'proof' that
you are not what you were created to be. The body is a thing of madness, meant
to surround the mind with a wall of flesh, and separate it from other minds. 

Mind is continuous; it cannot be separated into little disconnected pieces
unless you want that to be true. Your body appears to separate you from your
brother whose body likewise separates him from you. That is but a choice you
make, not a fact. Your minds are still joined as One. To know this, you must be
willing to accept the fact that you are not a body, you are Mind. The entire
experience and context of separation rests on the belief that what you are can
change and become something unlike itself. You believe that Mind, formless and
unlimited, can take on and become form which is limited. This is the basis for
the "I am a body" idea. 

Despite the persistence of this belief, you are not a body and never have been.
Yes, it is true the body is a part of your experience, and used rightly
according to the Holy Spirit's purpose, it will not hinder but will support
your awakening. In your awakening, you discover that you are not a body. In
fact, you are not even in a body; the body, like the world you see, is in your
mind. The body is but a projected image, used to apparently surround your mind
and wall it off from other minds, thus keeping you safe from Love. The body is
the home the ego has chosen; as long as you continue to identify with the ego,
with separation, you will think you are a body. 

The body need not limit you nor separate you from your brothers. In itself, the
body is a neutral thing, incapable of feeling or purpose. It does what you
assign it to do, nothing more and nothing less. If you would use it to
separate, it becomes your prison, reducing your mind to a tiny location in
space., From this tiny place of nothingness, you look out at all the other tiny
fragments of mind likewise confined, for as you see yourself you will see your
brothers. This need not be. 

If you so choose, the body can be a learning aid, used to help you learn the
lessons that end separation. It can be used as a teaching aid, to communicate
the Truth to your brothers who still think they are bodies. The body will
fulfill the purpose you give it. Why not accept the Holy Spirit's purpose and
use it to help set you free? 

Mind is continuous, extending everywhere without hindrance or limit. In the
world of separation, mind appears to be broken up into separate discontinuous
fragments whose communication with each other apparently takes place through
bodily forms. The continuous communication that joins all minds appears to be
interrupted, occurring sporadically, chaotically. The illusion of separation
thus appears to rule the mind as well as the body. In this condition, each
separate fragment seems to be isolated, complete in itself, with its own
private thoughts unshared with any others. This will indeed be your experience
if this is your choice: to live in a world of sleepwalkers, each lost in his
own dream, pursuing his own goals at the expense of all others. Is this what
you want? 

In truth, all minds are joined in a state of continuous communication with each
other and their Creator. Nothing can interrupt this communication but the wish
to be separate and alone. Even then is the experience of non-communication
nothing but illusion, yet illusion is what you experience as real. Only the
wish to be as you are not maintains the illusory experience of
non-communication with all that is. You can choose again, and you must if you
would have Reality restored to your awareness. To do what must be done to bring
you back into full communication, is the task of the Holy Spirit. He knows all
minds are joined forever, and He recognizes that you have lost awareness of
this fact. 

Through true vision, you are shown the Truth in your brother, the One Light
that shines in everything that God created. As you see this Light through the
Light in you, the Light in your brother will extend and join with you. Thus is
communication restored and the illusion of separation and discontinuity proven
false. The Light, like Mind, like Love, is One and nothing can interrupt or
fragment what God created One. Nothing in Heaven or earth is separate from God
or its true nature as the One Self.

