--- 
ref: "Chapter Five" 
title: "Love and Peace"
---

Love’s call will reach you if you let it. This call has gone on unceasingly
since time began. Yet you have not heard it because you have not been
listening. The din arising from the battlefield that is worldly life has
drowned out every call for Truth. The sounds of conflict will always obscure
the still, small voice of Spirit. Peace is more than the absence of strife.
True peace is a condition in which the thought of conflict cannot arise for its
cause has been healed. 

All conflict has its origin in the state of mind where fear prevails and your
brother is seen as separate and unrelated to you. Fear leads easily to hatred
and anger. Anger is always the desire to attack, and what you fear you will
hate. Hate perpetuates fear and attack, and the cycle continues without end as
long as fear and separation rule your mind. 

Peace begins with the recognition that my brother is myself, that only one of
us is here. With that understanding, I begin to see that all conflict starts
and ends with myself. Always and only it is myself I attack and nothing is
gained thereby, for only loss results. What I do to my brother, I do to myself.
I can never escape the effects of what I do for cause and effect are never
separated. 

The mind devoted to peace as its goal becomes a beacon, set on a hill, high
above the battlefield. From there, it shines upon its brothers, helping them to
lay down their arms and return to peace. Peace is the home of those who love
God and would extend that Love to their brothers. Love follows peace as surely
as fear follows conflict. When peace fills your heart, there is room for Love
only; conflict will not find a home there. 

All that will happen when you renounce conflict completely is that you will
leave this world forever. The dream cannot hold you captive if you refuse to
live by its terms. Belief in guilt and sin and therefore the continuance of
fear and the attack that follows, are the conditions set by the ego for life in
a world of apparent separation. 

## Give All You Have
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Do not believe what you see: a play of shadows appearing as if substantial,
flickering images appearing on the screen of your mind. Do not be the willing
victim of a trick you are playing on yourself any longer. You never really
wanted to live in separation from your Father and your Self. It was all a
mistake, an error, nothing more. An error that took hold of your mind and
seemed to make a world of fear, suffering and death. You can leave this world
at any time by changing your mind about its purpose. Let it be for you not your
home but a way station, a place you are passing through, giving aid to other
weary travelers before you leave it behind forever. 

What would you do if I told you to give away all you have to the poor and
follow me? Would you understand what I mean? To give all you have is to give
only what is real, for that is what you have and that is all you have. You do
not truly have what is not real; its possession is just a dream. What is real
is only what comes from God, what was given in your creation. That you must
give away for therein is its nature and meaning. By giving it to your brothers,
you are able to keep it for yourself; your store of God’s treasures only
increases. 

Those who lack the awareness of what they are, are poor indeed in the only real
sense. To give to them all you have, is to share the peace and the Love of God.
To see the Light in your brothers is to recognize them as they are in Truth. In
so doing, you are following in my footsteps, doing what I have done. I will
never ask you to do anything I have not done. What I did can you do also. In
fact, you must do it also for therein lies your salvation. Through my example,
through what I learned, can anyone find salvation through forgiveness. I call
upon my brothers to forgive as I have forgiven, for in that lies your escape
from pain, sorrow, and death. My life was not for me alone; its lessons were
learned for the benefit of everyone. My gift to my brothers was the way I lived
and the triumph over death. I proved that death is not real, that you cannot be
killed. My example removed all reasons to fear and hate, leaving only love and
forgiveness as the response to everyone at all times and in all circumstances. 

## Never True
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

What was never true is not true now nor will ever be. The Truth has not left
your mind. The Truth is your Mind, your Being, and your life. It has always
been so and always will be. Do not let belief in the projected illusion take
the place of Truth any longer. It is time to return to the home that has always
been yours, that awaits your decision to be as you are truly. 

This decision, despite all the apparent complexity and confusion that surrounds
and obscures it, is actually quite simple. You need only be willing to
recognize that you are not a body; you are not all the beliefs you hold about
yourself. In that recognition lies your release from every form of bondage,
from all pain and suffering. This willingness, rightly exercised, will develop
and grow until you are reunited with your Self. The decision that permits the
return of Truth is quite simple, straight forward, and consistent in its
application. Unless it remains so throughout the duration of your return
journey, you will suffer needless delay. 

The journey home need not take a long time. It can happen instantly if you
would so choose. At any stage, at any moment on the path of return, you can let
go all apparent obstructions, all experience of illusion, and disappear into
the Self. Yet is this seldom the case. Why? The mind vacillates in its
willingness, it commitment, its purpose. Old tendencies and habits die hard. 

The human mind is a battleground, a place of warring tendencies and desires.
Impulses come and go, and thoughts arise in a constant stream that demands your
attention. Reactions to outside events and the emotions that arise within pull
you first one way and then another. Emotions arouse thoughts, thoughts oppose
or judge emotions. A swirling maelstrom of activity is the mind of separation.
This constant distraction, this constant battle for your affections and
allegiance, drains your energy and weakens your purpose. 

The calming of the mind to bring it to a state of peace and quietness is thus
essential. A quiet mind has been made ready to receive the Truth which will not
wait long to enter. Truth’s return is assured once the obstacles to its coming
have been removed. You need only meet its conditions and you will be free once
again. 

## Be Present
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

What needs to be done in every situation and circumstance no matter the
conditions, is to be present wholly with whatever occurs without judgment or
reaction. You can only respond fully each moment if you are not limited by or
trapped by the past. If the past is operating in your mind and dominating the
present, you will project onto and interpret what is happening; never will you
meet the situation as it is. Only with a clear and open mind can freedom be
found no matter what the circumstances, and this freedom is offered to all
through the Holy Spirit. 

Freedom is the gift of being present without the past, being free to act from a
state of Love and Presence. To bring to the now only Love and openness is to
offer healing to everyone and everything. Only by giving healing to all will
you receive it. No one can be excluded from receiving the gifts you offer if
you would keep them for yourself. No matter what you would do, do it with Love
and you will be blessed. Happiness will always accompany Love just as sorrow
will always follow fear. 

## The Ego’s Goal
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Whenever there is any doubt as to who you are and Who your Father is, stop and
ask yourself this question. Who is it that doubts? What is it that does not
know what it is? The ego is ignorant of the Truth of what you are for the ego
knows nothing. The ego was born as a response to the terror of separation, as
the identity that took the place of your true identity. Meant to be the denial
of what you are in Truth and the defense against it, the ego will only tell you
that you are what you are not. Do not look to the ego for validation or
clarification. It will always tell you that you are a body, destined to sicken
and die, for this is what it believes. 

The Holy Spirit alone knows your true identity and holds that knowledge for you
until you are ready to accept it. Nothing prevents you from remembering who you
are except your refusal to do so. The fear engendered by the ego in your mind
prevents the willingness to remember from arising to awareness to set you free.
The defense against the return of the Self is so strong, well established, and
consistent, that you need help to free yourself. 

Although the defenses that keep you prisoner are of your own making, you have
forgotten that fact and so have lost control of them. They operate below the
threshold of conscious awareness; thus are they virtually autonomous and
completely effective at keeping the Truth away. Truth does not oppose and
cannot enter a mind where It is actively resisted. As conscious mind, caught in
a dream you do not realize you are dreaming, you go about your life completely
oblivious to the Truth that is in you and all around you. I once said, “You
shall know the Truth and the Truth shall set you free.” The Truth is freedom
itself. It then follows that not to know Truth is a state without freedom, a
condition of imprisonment. 

The ego’s goal is to keep you ignorant of who you are. Only by so doing can it
keep the walls that contain your mind intact. To identify with the ego, the
sense of being a separate identity, is to live in a state of ignorance. Such a
state is literally harmful to your well being for the state of illusion is both
the cause and the condition of suffering.

Yet is there always a solution to suffering of any kind and the ignorance that
is its cause. Truth, born of right understanding and correctly applied, will
remove the cause and with the disappearance of the cause do the effects vanish
also. The solution to illusion, which is always a state of willful, albeit
unconscious ignorance of Truth, is the choosing against illusion and the return
of Truth. Light will always shine away darkness, not by attacking or opposing
it, but by simply being what It is. Darkness, illusion, cannot exist in the
Presence of Truth. The awareness of Truth is the answer to separation and all
apparent problems that arise therefrom. Awareness of Truth is not a mental
construct, a concept, for Truth cannot be made an object of thought. It cannot
be experienced within the context of subject/object perception. Truth must be
directly experienced in Mind Itself as what you are. There is no other way to
find It and no other place It can be found. 

## What Is Truth
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Whatever can be seen, heard, or perceived in any way is not real. Whatever can
be thought of or about is not Truth. Truth cannot be captured by word, thought,
or concept. It lies forever beyond the reach of the mind of separation and its
activities, for Truth is One. In It is everything that is real; all of God’s
Creation is part of It, and nothing that was not created by God is real or
true. Only the Truth is true, and what is not the Truth is not true. 

Nothing that is made by the ego as part of separation and upholding the belief
in separation, has anything to do with Truth. All projections of mind are
illusions meant to conceal Truth, to obscure It and shatter It into many
discontinuous pieces with no relationship to one another. Do not be fooled by
color and form, by differences great and small. They do not matter. They are
not there. 

The purpose of the world you see is to blind you to Truth, to cover It up with
names and labels, categories and descriptions. What is One always and only,
appears as many, separated by time, space, and difference. Only thus is the
fiction of the ego’s existence maintained. The ego cannot survive where
separation has been replaced by Unity, for the ego is the belief in separation,
the thought system that arises from this belief, and the fictitious person to
whom these thoughts and the body seem to belong.

The personal identity is a phantom, the ghost in the machine that isn’t there.
When you look for it as if it were something substantial, you cannot find it.
The body is a wholly neutral thing and has no volition of itself. It simply
responds to the mind’s commands. There is no entity in mind. The mind is just a
collection of thoughts, feelings, and impulses that was set in motion a long
time ago. The sense of the ‘I’, of me, is just another thought although it is
the most basic thought as it arose from the idea of separation, and in its
arising, seemed to make separation possible by providing a central thought or
axis around which the experience of separation could be constructed, and from
which separation could be projected in an almost endless series of divisions. 

What you are in truth is not a physical or mental or emotional quantity. What
you are is completely unknown to the senses or to the thinking mind. Spirit is
beyond all measurement, all conceptualization, all perception. It can only be
known directly by Mind as Itself. This knowledge is not of this world for it
does not lie within the limits of time and space. You cannot reach such
knowledge through your efforts; the ‘you’ must disappear so that the Self can
reveal Itself in your mind as what you truly are, beyond all thought and all
sense of a separate identity. 

If what you truly are has no basis in separation, and is in fact the
demonstration that separation is impossible, then the separate identity that
seems to be you cannot exist. In order for a thing to exist, its existence must
be possible. Nothing whose existence is impossible can exist at all. Yet you
find yourself an apparent bodily identity, separate from everything you see,
and nowhere in the world around you is the Unity of all even remotely suggested
by your experience. How can that be? 

You are dreaming a dream, an impossible dream. Yet like all dreams, does the
impossible and improbable seem to be true, and the conditions of your dreaming
seem to determine your life and its purpose. The dreamer has forgotten the
Reality from which he comes although he has never left it. Dreaming can seem to
last a long, long time, yet when it is over you will see it lasted but an
instant. That is all the time it took for an entire universe of dreams to
arise, play out its drama, and disappear again. What else could a world made of
nothingness do but vanish from the mind that gave it birth when that mind grew
tired of dreaming, of its childish play, and let the memory of Truth return.
And the Truth will set you free from your own nightmares. Nothing has
imprisoned you in a dream of death but your decision to be what you are not,
and nothing can return you to the freedom you have always known but your
willingness to know your Self again. Whatever the cost of freedom, you will pay
it gladly if you could but remember, even for a moment, the freedom you have
always known in God.

## Freedom
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

In this world freedom must be earned for it has been thrown away and replaced
with what denies and devalues it; fear has taken its place. Fear and freedom
are incompatible; freedom is a state in which fear is absent. Fear denies
freedom just as freedom demonstrates that fear cannot exist. The absence of
fear is Love and freedom. They are never apart and they remain with you
forever. If you are to realize freedom however, you must renounce fear in all
its forms and lay down all desire to attack. It is fear and only fear that robs
you of freedom. In fact, when you invented fear, you turned your back on the
freedom in which you were created and chose slavery instead.

Whatever you may do with your mind, you are expressing freedom or you are
giving form to fear. These are the only two possibilities. Sure it is the many
different responses that seem to be required in life do not appear to be
limited to these two, yet that is all you are ever called upon to choose
between. One choice leads you back to Heaven, the other maintains your place in
hell. You cannot return to Heaven unless you are free to do so. To let fear
rule your mind is to imprison yourself and lose sight of your true home. 

Freedom begins with the recognition that fear and fear only is the obstacle to
freedom. Fear weakens you, leaving you cowering behind thick walls whose
purpose is to protect you from what threatens you. Yet what threatens you is a
fearful projection of your own mind. When you take back your projections,
ceasing to give them an autonomy they do not possess, they will lose their hold
over you and you will be free. 

Nothing can limit your freedom but your own thoughts. They are used to
construct your prison or they are used to set you free; the choice of how they
are used is yours and yours alone. It is not necessary to think according to
what you have been taught by the ego. That is merely habit and is valueless in
itself. The ego would have you believe that what is true is false, and what is
false is true. What it teaches is always the opposite of Truth; the ego cannot
survive in the Presence of Truth so it must always obscure, avoid, deny, or
contradict what is true. Everything the ego has ever taught you is false and
will only hurt you. 

Freedom is the return to Reality. Only there will it be found. The ego is the
denial of Reality; it does not know freedom for it cannot know that in whose
presence it will disappear. You need not ask the ego about freedom nor accept
its ideas about anything. All ideas that arise from ego consciousness make no
sense and will only mislead you. What else can you expect from a mistake made
so long ago and then forgotten, though it lives on in your mind as if the past
were present still? Lay it down my brother, lay your burden down and return to
life. 

## Needs
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

The needs you perceive are not real. They are part of the dream, and the belief
that you are in need of anything is itself a fundamental delusion that upholds
the foundation of the false identity. For what but a body, seemingly fragile
and requiring constant care and attention, would have needs that must be
constantly attended to? The illusory needs whose fulfillment takes so much of
your time and energy, have but one purpose: to distract you from recognizing
the one and only need you have in the world of separation. 

The return of the memory of God to your awareness is the only need that is
real. To heal the separation is the purpose of life, the only purpose that is
meaningful and capable of accomplishment. If you devote your life to awakening
from the dream, to fulfilling your only need, all your other 'needs' will be
met. Your Father gave answer to all problems and needs His Son experienced in
the dream projection once and for all through the creation of the Holy Spirit.
The Holy Spirit takes God's one Answer and translates It into forms you
recognize that meet your needs as you perceive them. 

Do not forget that you are not a body. Nothing else will free your mind. Only
the recognition of what you are not will open the way to experiencing what you
are in Truth. You are not confined by a physical form unless you choose to be.
This choice can be undone by choosing once again. 

## Love
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Whatever occupies your mind that is not Love, be it thoughts, feelings,
beliefs, or memories, must be relinquished to make room for Love. All that is
not Love must be healed that Love may return and claim its own. Love belongs to
you and you belong to Love. As *A Course in Miracles* states so simply and
eloquently, "Teach only Love for that is what you are." If Love is what you are
and you do not experience Love as it is, then you are not experiencing yourself
as you are. To be the Self, the Christ, is to be Love only. If you are not
being Love only, then you are being something other than what you are in Truth.
This substitute identity has robbed you of your true identity by taking its
place. However, this was not foisted upon you; it was a decision you made long
ago, and it remains in effect until you change your mind and choose again. 

What if you let go all fear, renounced fear forever, recognized it for the
nothingness it is, and decided to feel only the emotion that is real, Love?
What if you decided to love only, only to love? What would happen? You would be
free and joy would flood your mind and carry you to God. God is Love and you
are a part of His Love, a creation of His Love, and you are Love. As a channel
of His Love and mercy, you have the privilege of bringing Love to a world that
has denied itself what it needs most. You bring a Love that shines into all the
dark and secret places hidden in the human mind. Love will illuminate all fear,
all grievances. It will expose the deep sorrow, and the twisted hates that cast
their dark shadow across the mind of separation. Love sees all and shines away
all darkness, all that denies Love, through its beneficent gaze. 

Whenever you are tempted to choose fear over Love, remember what that choice
has cost you in pain and suffering. It has cost you the Peace of God and the
knowledge of your true relationship with Him. Would you perpetuate this
separation or would you repair it? Every choice for fear and attack in any form
continues the rejection of your Creator and the deep loneliness that has marked
your life ever since. Do not forget what you are choosing with each decision
you make: life or death. 

Love will always lead you back to life eternal. It shines away death in all its
disguises leaving only the One Light. The Love and Light of Your Father is what
you are. By offering only That and nothing else, you will find there is nothing
else. God is your Being, your Mind, your Love, and your Life. Never forget this
for your Father never forgets you. 

Do not underestimate your resistance to Love, for it plays a major role in
keeping the separation in place. If you would drop all defenses and simply
love, this world would fall away and you would find yourself in the Presence of
your Creator. Unfortunately, it is this you fear more than anything in this
world although this is your only need. 

When you are called upon to love, the ego offers you a distorted version of
love to take Love's rightful place. The ego teaches that you are unworthy of
real Love because of your sinful nature. It then teaches you that your brothers
are likewise guilty. Thus the only basis you share on which Love can be
established between you is your mutual unworthiness. You and your brother agree
that since you are both guilty and un-worthy of being loved, your relationship
will maintain this guilt by never bringing it to conscious awareness. Instead,
you take turns projecting onto each other in an attempt to keep guilt alive
without taking responsibility for it. What results is a love/hate dynamic that
characterizes to some extent most human relationships. If you honestly search
your mind, you will find that you have grievances towards everyone no matter
how much you think you love them. 

Such relationships offer you but a parody of what Love is. Yet is there still,
though masked by the ego's distortions, a kernel of Love's meaning to be found.
In the honest sharing, the recognition of a true common interest, and the human
attempt to forgive in good faith, Love is faintly reflected but that is enough.
All your relationships have the potential to be holy relationships, and that is
what they must become if you are to know Love again. Through your relationships
with your brothers, you have the chance to learn forgiveness and true giving. 

## Giving
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Whenever the opportunity arises to give, you must respond for you are always
giving but to yourself. Every chance to help another by giving is a chance to
share the gifts of God you have received and thus increase what you have. All
that is real will only be increased by giving it away; that is why it is given
you. Do not underestimate the power of your giving. Giving will set you free.
It is Love that gives; and when your giving has become total, Love will return. 

The ego gives always to get, but the Christ in you gives because it is His
nature and brings Him joy. You cannot lose by giving truly, by giving from your
heart. Whatever is given will return to you, albeit in a different form. Your
store of divine gifts increases with every act of giving. Your Father only
gives, He never takes. If you would be like Him, and you are like Him, you must
give everything to everyone. By so doing, you are set free from the ego's
thought system of fear and sacrifice. To give cannot be a sacrifice if you only
gain thereby. 

What the ego would have you do is limit giving to only a few and exclude all
others. Even with these few however, giving is too often a kind of exchange
where each gives to get. Giving that you may receive something in return is not
true giving; it is rather a thinly disguised attempt to manipulate each other.
Love does not manipulate, and all real giving is an expression of Love. Every
gift truly given always arises from Love and includes Love no matter the form
or circumstance. 

Whether you should give or not is never the question. Always it is only the
opportunity to give that is important. You have innumerable occasions every day
to give to your brothers. A smile, a kind word, a chance to help, the form of
the gift matters not. You must give and give freely, and you will always
receive. As you give all you truly have freely to all your brothers, you will
receive freely from your Father. He is always giving you everything as He did
in your Creation, but unless you give to all as He does, you cannot accept His
gifts. 

