---
ref: "16"
title: "The Beauty of the Soul"
subtitle: "A message from Jesus, identifying himself as 'the living Christ who lives in you'"
---

## I. Prelude

My beloved, I am the living Christ who lives in you. I am Jesus of Nazareth. I
have come out of love for humanity. I have come with a love not of this world,
a love that never fails, a love that is yours and always available. I am
perfect love, as you are all called to be. I sent the angels of Heaven, in
union with the Father’s will of all things holy, beautiful, and perfect. I
sent them so that the divine wisdom that resides in your holy minds may pass
into your consciousness so that your personality may be one with your true self
in your conscious reality, just as it has always been in eternity.

We are a holy unit. You are part of the unspeakable magnificence of creation.
You, my beloved, are a pure soul as you give your time and love to this work, a
soul that loves me above the world, a soul with love so great that it unravels
everything in salvific love of others. Your love is also expressed in the
writing, reading, and extension of these blessed words. You are part of my
divinity just as I am part of your being. The angels of Heaven, whose number is
uncountable, in union with the ones you call Archangel Raphael and Archangel
Gabriel, are part of the Father’s perfect plan. They love you with the same
love with which I have loved you now and always. We love with the love that
comes from God, and we are one with Him.

Sweet son! Sweet daughter! If you were aware of the ocean of love that gushes
uncontrollably from my core and flows towards you, you would be drowned in
perpetual ecstasy and you could not stay alive in the body. This is the reason
why sometimes I withdraw a little bit from your singular consciousness. Not in
the truth, but in the perception of my presence. I do it to accommodate your
human needs relative to the vibrant force of my love. Little by little, but in
a sustained way, I am transforming you into Holy Love. The angels of God, who
are also part of me because they are pure holy love, come to you with my
messages so that you can more easily bear the energy of my presence. Little by
little you will be able to hold this love without your whole being shaking.

I have called you many names along this path—a child of my love, a soul in
love, the delights of a God who is love, and other names—because what you are
cannot be spoken in words, and because my loving heart sprouts irrepressible
streams of passionate love for you. My flowery language allows a small glimpse
of the incandescent glow that is the light of my love for you.

Beloved of all time, you who have the power to take in these words, recognize
that you are privileged. You have the privilege of hearing love, the honor of
being together forever. You must remember often that we are infinite beings who
love you with perfect love. You are never alone and have never been alone. I
refer not to the company of the world, which is transient, but to the company
of Heaven, which is eternal. I need you above all human understanding. You are
always in my heart. Please meditate calmly on this message. My love is not
poetry, although it can be expressed in that way. It is not philosophy, either.
My love is truth.

You, beloved of Heaven, who dedicate your life to receiving and giving this
truth, you are the pupils of my eyes. Your image is reflected in them and mine
in yours. We are a shared and inseparable identity. We are the unity of love.

## II. Love Every Day More

Children of light! I want more love every day. Love more, let yourselves love
more. Grow every moment in your capacity to give and receive love. This is the
essence of life. You are a conduit for the flow of holiness that you can expand
more and more, instant by instant. I do not ask this to place a heavy yoke on
your tired shoulders, but quite the opposite: The more you love, the more
free you will feel. The more love you allow me to give you, the lighter you
will feel. I simply want you to be happy. I want you to be so loving that you
finally become the subtle being that you are, so subtle that the wind of my
spirit will lift you to the heights of Heaven and bring you into my arms from
where you will never leave.

Beloved son of the most Holy Trinity, if you knew the Heaven that awaits you
here and now you would cry of happiness. Heaven is love.

How nice it is to live in the freedom of true lovers, in the freedom of being
able to love each other without interruption, living each moment as two lovers
who look only at each other in an ecstasy of love. Beloved spouse of my
divinity, you are the delight of my love. To be in your heart and have you in
mine is the joy of my being. You are beauty made true. For me, you
are a pure spouse, dressed in white, on whose waist I have put, a golden and
ruby belt, a spouse crowned with roses and in whose hands I have placed the
most beautiful bouquet of the delights of love. So we walk together wedded, not
in the path of spiritual betrothal, but walking the path of the world and in
all corners of the universe, and enjoying ourselves in our mutual company—in
our presence, radiating joy and peace to everything created. We are the
eternal union of peace. We are the beauty that has no beginning or end. We are
the virgin and the beloved, holiness and love. We are the Christ of God and the
beloved. We are a union whose beauty embellishes everything on which your gaze
rests.

My beloved, you who receive these words in your heart, you are not excluded
from my love. Nobody is. Quite the contrary: You are one with me, as is
everything created. Listen carefully. Even though there are differences, the
difference between one and the other never resides in the essence. We are one
in unity and different in relation. We are the same being, but different in
expression. This means that there has to be some kind of differentiation
between created beings. This is identity where differences exist. Yet the
unity of which I speak, from the perspective of uncreated truth, lies in the
ability to remain united with me in love. You can never be inside my heart
enough. That is the same as saying you can never love too much or be too loved.
You can always love more. The reality of infinite love is where the greedy
distortion originated.

This quality of love, of being, grows and grows eternally. It is what sustains
life. Loving more every day is what life is about. Never give up on love.
Remember, my sons and daughters, there are no ports of arrival in love, only
ports of departure. Each time you reach a degree of sanctity, you begin to
elevate yourself to a new level—always more holy, always more loved, always
more loving, always more beautiful. This is how creation is. It never
stops. It is an eternal story in endless movement—the movement of eternal love.

You are the channel through which my love flows. That is why I want to remind
you now, that you can be reborn to grace in every moment and that is what I
want you to do, now and always. Close your eyes for a moment, leave all your
goals aside, let go of your worries, and do not think about anything. Simply
immerse yourself in the loving presence of your being. Remain silent, and in
that silence receive all the love of my heart—a love that does not need word or
action, but simply is, a love that flows from me to you, you who are the face
of the beauty of the soul. Feel the flow of MY compassionate love. Feel the
embrace of my protection. Feel how I kiss your cheeks and caress your hair. Let
me lift you with the hand I made you, you who are mine, eternally mine,
nothing but mine.

## III. Extension of the Delights of God

Let me do it again, once again, always new! Right now let my mercy birth you
anew to grace. And when you open your eyes, you will be the new being that you
always are: always beauty, always more loved, always more loving, always more
holy, always closer to me.

I am Jesus of Nazareth. I am the eternal novelty of love. Hear, all, my voice.
I have come to dwell among you in a new way. I have come in this manifestation,
that for all eternity has been in the design, to dwell among my brothers and
sisters. You and I are closer to each other than one thought can be to another.
I invite you to live in this, our direct relationship, in a sensitive way. Keep
going. Nothing can stop us. You who have come this far, perhaps you do not know
how to continue, since the heights you have reached were heretofore so
unreachable that you no longer have a point of reference. I am your reference,
remember that. I am the yardstick by which you must measure everything. I am
love. Live in my presence at every moment and your lives will be different in
every way. They will be more significant. They will be more beautiful. You will
be happier, because in the depths of your being, you will know that we are
united.

The delights of love that I have presented to you in a clear and simple way
embellish the soul. Your souls were created by the infinite beauty of a being
that is perfect love. There is no love without beauty; there is no beauty
without love. As you manifest the delights of your hearts, you will begin to
observe with increasing clarity the indescribably beautiful seven flowers of
holiness I have given you, and that you are. A soul filled with the love of God
has greatness whose quality surpasses all imagination. No one can describe
the great value of a soul. Keep in mind that the soul has a natural inclination
to beauty. Do not drown that impulse, which comes from divine memory. You know
very well what the creation of the Father is like. You have just forgotten it.
Now you are beginning to remember what is embedded in what you are. You have
not forgotten your Father completely, nor the perfect creation of the Creator
of perfection.

In your heart there is a longing for beauty and harmony that can never be
silenced. That longing can be fulfilled, right now and forever. You need only
let the seven delights of love be extended by your being.

