---
ref: "Chapter Four"
title: "Decision Making"
---

Who is the one who makes decisions for you? Is it the ego, the illusory voice
of separation, or is it the Holy Spirit Who speaks for God and Truth? Decisions
are never made alone. They are always made in collaboration with the voice you
are listening to; they always proceed from and uphold the thought system your
guide represents. Your decisions stem from the belief in separation and all
that entails, or they rest on Truth and move you in Its direction. 

Decisions are always made with the guide you have chosen. Each decision is a
choice for the ego or the Voice for God. Certainly it does not seem as if you
are choosing life or death with every decision you make, yet that is exactly
what you are doing. Your unawareness of this fact affects it not at all.
Decisions arise from the necessity of choosing between alternatives presented
you by constantly changing circumstances and events. They are at once both a
response and an attempt to control the chaos of life and make it manageable.
Decisions made with the ego’s help are themselves an expression of chaos. They
are an attempt to manage chaos by introducing more chaos. This will obviously
lead to the continuation of chaos and strengthen the need to manage and control
it. Chaos does not need to be controlled; it needs to be recognized as
nothingness. 

If you turn over decision making to the Holy Spirit, He will guide you out of
chaos. You need not live in that condition though your feet still walk the
earth. Through the recognition of Truth and the undoing of false mind, you may
transcend its effects and live in a state of Grace where that which lies beyond
illusion becomes available to you. How do you live surrounded by the chaos of
separation, yet be unaffected by it? Live in a state of true consciousness with
Love as your guiding Light, and all darkness will be shined away until you see
the Truth reflected everywhere. 

## What You Have
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

If the good you do lives on, do you not want to do good always? By the good we
mean that which helps, supports, heals, and inspires in the most positive way.
By doing good always, by helping everyone everywhere, you are helping yourself
in the best possible way. Everything you give to your brothers is also your
gift to yourself. This is the real meaning of the expression “Virtue is its own
reward.” To do good, to act rightly, to be virtuous, is always in your own best
interest. You only gain thereby and never do you lose. 

The ego would have you believe that your interest and that of your brothers is
not the same, that what is gained by one is lost to the other. The ego believes
in a world of scarcity where there is never enough for everyone. Competition is
the law and you must struggle to get what you need, wresting it from another if
necessary. This view, if accepted, leaves you no choice but to operate in a
climate of fear and suspicion where conflict is the rule and safety is found
only through isolation. The world you see around you is the result of the
identification with the ego’s perspective. Only suffering will follow those who
live from this lack of understanding. 

The Holy Spirit teaches that you already have everything you need because you
are everything. In Truth, having and being are the same. You have what you are
and you are what you have. In the world of separation, He translates this Law
of God into the forms that meet the needs you perceive. You believe your needs
are many and different, so God’s one Answer appears to take many forms to
fulfill them. All is but illusion, yet as long as God’s Son believes illusions
real, He must be provided help in a form He can recognize. 

If you remember your Father, and devote your life to realizing your true
purpose, you will never suffer from lack. What is needed will be provided. This
does not mean however, you will always have what you want. The egoically
identified mind is habitually preoccupied with getting and achieving. Much if
not most of what it desires is not needed in any real sense. What is not
necessary for life or helpful to your real purpose, will not be provided by the
Holy Spirit. All that is merely distraction or self destructive can only hurt
you and delay fulfillment. Yet can you succeed in obtaining what you desire
strongly enough through the misuse of your energy and intent, but you will
never gain by doing so. 

## Mind and Time
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

You do not recognize what will help and what will hurt you because you do not
know the difference between Truth and illusion. This will be learned of the
Holy Spirit if you are willing to be shown the extent of your ignorance, that
your mind be purified of what is false to make room for what is true. Illusion
will always hurt you whether recognized or not. Being the replacement for
Truth, it can only bring disaster. To lose the awareness of Truth is disaster,
for all your problems arise from it. 

When the wish to be what you are not replaced the knowledge of what you are,
suffering became possible in your experience though not in Truth. Existence
became a dream, a projection of separation from all that is real. To be
separate from Reality Itself is suffering, though that fact goes unrecognized.
The mind asleep and dreaming a world of form and activity does not realize the
condition it is in; the deep pain of separation from God has been banished from
awareness. All things of which the mind is afraid have been dissociated from
conscious awareness, all memories of suffering hidden deep in the unconscious
mind. 

You cannot escape from what has been allowed to enter your mind by pretending
it is not there. Only the decision to heal, to release it, will free you from
the past you carry still. The past is always with you, although it is over.
Held in memory by the refusal to let it go, it affects you still. Everything
that enters the mind remains, for it is there by your invitation and decision
until you decide again. To free the mind of the entire past in every sense of
the word, is the purpose of the mind training. 

To free yourself of the past you carry still, you must be willing to let it go.
This seems like an obvious statement, too self-evident to need repeating, yet
the past has a much greater hold on you than you realize. The self image, the
identity you have given yourself, is an artifact of the past. It lives only in
the past and seems to be who you are now only through memory, through reliving
the moment of separation every moment of every day. To successfully release the
past is to lose the self you have believed in for so long. To the mind long
accustomed to identifying with the body and the sense of separation that is the
ego, this seems to be annihilation. You fear this more than death. Yet is death
only of the self. Give up the self and death will vanish from your mind
forever. The old must pass away, must be expelled from present awareness
through the relinquishment of the past. Only then can you be reborn as the
Christ, the Holy Son of God. 

Only the Christ in you is real, just as the present is the only moment of time
that is real. Time and eternity intersect in the present, and the Christ waits
for you there. He is always with you, waiting for your willingness to let Him
back into the mind that is His. Never has He left; He cannot, for your mind and
being are part of His. If that were not so, you would not exist. 

## The Nature of the Ego
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

The nature of the ego is to keep everything it finds valuable or useful for
itself. It shares grudgingly and gives only to get. The ego sees the world from
a position of scarcity; it believes that everything it wants, it must fight
for. Conflict and competition are its approach to life, and never is sharing
regarded as gain. For the ego to gain, must another lose. If you follow the
ego’s thought system, you are opposing God’s laws with everything you do. Thus
are you guaranteed suffering and loss; and conflict and sorrow will be the
conditions under which you live. No other outcome is possible if you choose to
follow the guide who leads you into fear and pain. 

What if you were to throw caution to the winds? To be cautious means to proceed
slowly, examining things very closely and carefully before making a decision.
This is the essence of the human condition, is it not? To judge, to weigh, to
consider, to analyze, is how human life proceeds. Or to react, to act blindly,
following impulses arising from habit, from addictions, from whatever
particular distortions animate the mind. Human life fluctuates between these
extremes, varying according to the individual’s disposition and changing events
and circumstances. 

The ego is itself a chaotic arrangement, feeling itself under constant threat,
unaware of where it came from or where it is going. To try to control what
happens to assure a favorable outcome makes perfect sense to the ego. By so
doing it believes it can keep away what threatens it and assure its safety. The
ego also tries to maximize what pleases it and avoid entirely or minimize what
it does not like. And it will always try to avoid pain and discomfort and
escape from fear. 

If you do the ego’s bidding; if you identify yourself as a body in separation
and accept the thought system that underlies this error, you will be subject to
the constant movement of fear. Where fear rules the mind, peace is absent. Fear
will always bring conflict in its wake; attack and defense will characterize
your life and guide your decisions. The ego is fearful of everyone and
everything. It carries the memory of that fearful moment when it arose as your
response to what you did not understand. The state of separation is inherently
fearful because what is separate from you, you do not understand. And what you
do not understand, you fear. That which you do not understand must be defended
against, for it is untrustworthy. All things that appear separate are regarded
with suspicion. 

Trust is impossible to find in such a world, reserved for those who have
‘proved’ themselves worthy; even then it can be withdrawn if you feel your
trust has been betrayed. The ego’s trust is always given conditionally and
jealously guarded that it may withdrawn at any time. No one can be trusted
completely in the ego’s view, for the trusted one may suddenly turn and attack.
The ego cannot but project its own untrustworthiness and ever-readiness to
attack onto others, for what is believed inwardly is always projected and
perceived as if outside of you. 

## Trust
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Trust can only be given to what is true and unchanging. You can trust God and
His Creation which is what you are. Nothing else is worthy of your trust though
you need not fear it. Would you place your trust in the shifting sands of
appearances, in circumstances that are inherently unstable? Nothing in the
world of appearances can be trusted. That is not where you should place your
trust. Trust in God and His Answer to the separation, and the circumstances of
physical life will be adjusted accordingly. The biblical injunction to seek
first the Kingdom of God and all these things shall be added unto you, is true
in the literal sense. Put your trust in God, allow the healing of your mind,
give up the denial of and defense against the Truth, and God’s Blessings will
rain upon you. God’s Gifts, which are not of this world, will be translated by
the Holy Spirit into the physical conditions necessary for human life. Do not
interfere with your Father’s giving and you will receive what you need. 

To receive what you need is to recognize what you already have and to accept
it. Your Father gave you everything in your creation. You lack nothing, yet you
believe in a world of scarcity and so is lack then a part of your experience.
To recognize that all you have comes from God and to accept that fact, frees
your mind and allows the Holy Spirit to provide what you need at all times and
in all circumstances. Nothing else need be done, for there is indeed nothing to
be done other than to recognize your complete dependence on God and surrender
to that Truth. 

## Truth
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

The recognition of Truth and your relationship to It, even in a world of
separation, will set your mind on the path to freedom and true Self
fulfillment. Life must take place in the context of right relationship to what
is true and what is false to be meaningful. The great problem of this world, to
find meaning amid meaninglessness, purpose among the purposeless, fulfillment
in the midst of the unfulfilled, can only be solved through commitment to
living a life of service to Truth. To serve the Truth is to accept your part in
the Great Plan of Atonement, and do your best to complete it. By doing this,
you become a source of Light and blessing in a world badly in need of both. We
stand together, all who have made that commitment, in the Light and Love of
God, as one endless chain of Grace and healing that circles the entire world
and reaches all the way back to Heaven. There is no place where God’s Grace is
not for those whose hearts are open to receive It, and by this receiving to
share It with their brothers. 

What is given to one is given to all, and what truly belongs to one heart
extends to all hearts. How can that which is One be contained? All are included
within Its beneficence. Limitless and forever extending, God’s Love is always
available. There is nowhere It cannot be found. Yet you must meet Its
conditions, for in a world of separate bodies, Love has been replaced by fear. 

## Peace
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Fear maintains a stranglehold on the mind that has identified itself with a
body, with separation. Life as a bodily identity sees threats everywhere it
looks. Surrounded by enemies waiting for the opportune moment to strike, it
cannot but be fearful in the face of constant danger. If you identify with the
body, with the sense of separation that is the ego’s partial and distorted
perception, fear will be your chosen companion and never will you find peace.
The presence of fear will always engender conflict and drive peace from your
mind. 

Peace need not be absent from your awareness and will not be unless you value
what has taken its place. The world offers you many gifts whose purpose is to
take the place of peace. Do not accept the worthless offerings of the ego whose
only goal is conflict. The ego does not know peace and will never accept it. 

To commit yourself to peace is to turn your back on the ego in every way. You
cannot identify yourself with the ego without choosing conflict as a way of
life however that may be disguised. Let conflict go, banish it from your mind,
and peace will prevail. Choose conflict, cherish attack in any form, and the
chaos of war will obscure your natural state and peace will vanish. 

There is no need to strive for peace. Like Love, it will be there when you have
allowed all that obstructs your awareness of it to be healed. When the mind has
been cleared of all attachment to conflict, of all need to defend and attack,
peace will shine forth as your natural state. If you do not resist the Holy
Spirit in His work of correcting and healing your mind, you will be speedily
returned to the condition in which God is remembered. 

## Understanding Mind
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Resistance to the Holy Spirit in the form of refusing to turn over decision
making to the One Who knows, is why the transformation of mind seems to take
forever. The mind is split. It contains conflicting and contradictory desires
that literally obstruct and make impossible a return to Wholeness. Integration
precedes Wholeness and makes it possible for the mind to recover its natural
state. Integration of the mind replaces the conflicting desires and cross
purposes with a single purpose, one that is true and capable of accomplishment.
For those who seriously want to realize the Wholeness of Mind, the process
starts with the practice of integration. To become aware of desire in all its
forms that drive the mind, is the first step you must take. Without being aware
of how and why the mind is as it is, you cannot begin to correct it. Present
awareness, moment by moment, is the way to see your mind in action, to directly
experience and become aware of the dynamics and movement of mind in your day to
day life. Mind must be understood as it is, in its activity. It cannot be
reduced to theory or description. Mind is alive and always active. 

Through becoming aware of your mind in action, you can choose where you want it
to go. You can direct it towards Truth, towards liberation, or you can continue
to let the past play out its stale repetition of nothingness until you tire of
it or death intervenes. As you become more and more aware of the activity of
your mind, you will begin to understand how your thinking and your reactions,
which are determined by your thinking, are responsible for the conditions and
circumstances of your life. You will see how you are choosing happiness or
conflict, Love or fear, with every decision you are making. When this becomes
so consistently clear that it can no longer be denied; when you can no longer
hide from what is in your mind and your responsibility for it; when self
awareness becomes the way you live, then choosing begins to become consistent,
for only what is true will attract you. 

## His Gifts
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Whatever you need will be given you when you turn your life over to the higher
purpose. By accepting God’s purpose as your own, you stop obstructing the flow
of His Gifts into your life. When your will is not exercised in opposition to
His, the way is open to receive His Gifts rather than deny Them. They are
always available to His children but they must be accepted first. The mind
focused on the shabby offerings of the ego, on the hollow honors and
attainments the world bestows, is not open to receive. “Seek ye first the
Kingdom” is the admonition to direct your mind and efforts towards that which
is truly valuable and worthy of having. When you do so, what you need in the
worldly sense will also be given. The Holy Spirit knows what you need and will
provide it if you do your part to make yourself available to receive. 

The great error that prevents this availability is the belief that you need to
decide by yourself. Thereby do you impose another will between yourself and
God, and while you believe such a thing is possible, your opposition to your
Father will effectively exclude His help. God does not and has not abandoned
His children; His children have abandoned Him. You cannot receive that which
you are actively opposing. Refusal will always prevent reception. 

## The Defense Against God
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

The need to defend yourself against the return of God’s Presence to your
awareness, is the reason behind the endless ‘busyness’ of the human mind. If
you were to let go of all defenses against Him, your Father would reach down
and lift you up. He cannot do so however, while you are actively resisting and
denying Him. God remains with His Creation, it cannot be otherwise. Yet can the
Son of God lose communication with his Father through the belief in an alien
will. You cannot hold in your awareness what you fear and oppose. You will
dissociate yourself from it, driving it from your mind and replacing it with
what is an effective defense against its return. 

There never will be a violation of your free will, for it was given you by God
in your creation. God does not contradict Himself or violate His own Laws.
Neither can anyone or anything else. His Laws were established for your
protection and upheld by His Will which never changes. The responsibility for
the condition of your mind, for what it includes and what it excludes, is yours
and yours only. Your decisions, your choices, determine what lives in your
awareness or slumbers in the depths of the unconscious. Once a decision has
been made, it remains in effect until you revisit it and choose again. It
matters not whether the decision was made long ago or yesterday. All of the
mind’s decisions are final until changed or corrected. 

Whatever you truly desire with all your heart and mind will be given you
without delay. “Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and all thy mind and
all thy soul,” was the great law I expressed as reported in the Bible. This was
the admonition to turn completely towards your Father without ambivalence, to
desire only what is true, eternal, unchanging, and completely valuable. The
vacillation between desiring only Truth or being attracted to illusion,
prevents the acceptance of Truth now in Its completeness. A partial and erratic
commitment will bring about inconsistent results. 

## What Limits Mind
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

The mind of separation, the perceptual mind, suffers from a split identity.
This divides the energy of mind, weakening it, and destroys clarity. The
motivation of such a mind is ambivalent and contradictory. Confusion prevails
as long as conflicting desires, impulses, and goals dominate thinking and
behavior. The mind is pulled in different directions, first this way and then
that way. Each desire or impulse that arises takes the place of the one that
preceded it. Thus is the mind in a state of constant agitation, chasing the
shadows that flit across its surface, taking them to be real. While all your
energy is used to perpetuate illusion, your mind will remain in bondage to what
it made so long ago. The self made chains that bind you will not fall away
while you are continually reinforcing them. Reinforcing faulty learning will
not correct it. Faulty learning will not leave the mind that welcomed and
cherished it as long as you are satisfied with the results of your thinking. 

Until you recognize the cause of your suffering, you will not be willing to
change your mind, to alter your thinking. To do so requires an honesty and a
clarity you do not as of yet possess. It can be and must be developed however,
if you would be free of suffering. The Holy Spirit will gently show you the
true condition of your mind, of your life, if you will trust Him. He will help
you become aware of all that you hide from yourself that you may see your mind
as it is, not as you imagine it to be. 

Whenever you choose what you do not realize will hurt you, you are being
complicit in your own destruction. Suffering is not possible without your
consent and active compliance with its conditions. Your lack of awareness of
the part you play in bringing about the suffering in your life, keeps you
prisoner to what you would escape. To be unaware of what shapes your life and
determines its course and conditions, is to be as a leaf blown about by the
shifting winds, landing for a moment it knows not where, then off again with
every passing breeze. You are helpless in the face of what you do not know or
understand. 

The mind functions in a consistent way; this is determined by habits of thought
and feeling and the beliefs that underlie them. Many beliefs are unconscious.
You are unaware of them and the role they play in driving your thinking and
controlling your behavior. They are not open to question or correction yet play
an important role in your decisions. 

The falsity in your mind cripples your understanding and limits your happiness.
Everything that you believe is based on the past and does not serve you now.
Unless you raise to question all that you believe, it cannot be corrected and
replaced by true ideas. All that is false, untrue, yet living in your mind,
must be undone to make room for Truth. There is nothing that cannot be done
when the mind has been returned to Truth. 

The mind in its natural state understands what is needed and what is
unnecessary. What is true and what is false is easily recognized when you have
allowed the Holy Spirit to guide you through the process of learning the
difference between them. Your mind carries much within it in the form of old
ideas, beliefs, values, and judgments. This past baggage will gradually be
lifted from your mind, leaving it clean and empty, a fit vessel to receive the
Truth. 

There is a way to tell always what is needed and helpful and what must be
discarded and left behind. That which leaves you in a state of peace, of love,
of happiness, is to be accepted into your mind and cherished. All thoughts and
feelings, all reactions that pull you away from the natural state of freedom,
are to be corrected. Thus is your mind returned to Truth and Truth only. When
only Love remains, God will return to your awareness. 

## Maintain Separation
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Without constant and consistent effort, separation cannot be maintained for it
is an unnatural state and therefore inherently unstable. Although separation is
all you know, that does not mean it is your natural condition. You have
forgotten who you are long ago and its memory is now beyond your reach. What is
completely unnatural and unthinkable in your true state, has now become
‘normal’ and beyond question. The ego cannot allow you to question the reality
of your experience under its guidance, for its carefully constructed picture of
reality cannot stand up to careful scrutiny. 

Without your consent, the picture of reality in separation will crumble into
the nothingness it has always been. Only the abdication of responsibility for
what you see and experience allows the ego to maintain the fiction that you are
the effect of the world and not its cause. Thus are you the victim of what
seems to happen to you and are not responsible for it. There are two ‘logical’
conclusions that arise from this view. First is the belief you are helpless in
the face of what occurs, and thus you must protect yourself from the world.
This perspective makes certain that fear is maintained in your mind which
justifies the need to defend and attack. And you are thereby relieved of
responsibility for your attacks on your brothers and unaffected by what you do
to them. 

The whole edifice of guilt, sin and attack, rests on the belief that you are
not responsible for what happens in your life. This unquestioned assumption
enables the entire belief system of separation to be maintained, and ensures
the continuation of the ego’s role as your guide to decision making. It is
vitally important to take back the responsibility for your life in every
detail. In this decision is the invitation given to the Holy Spirit to offer
you an alternative to the ego’s thought system. 

The guide you choose to follow in your decision making determines the kind of
life you will have. The ego’s guidance will lead you down many different paths,
each with its own experiences and goals, for this is a world of apparent
differences and varying outcomes. Yet are they all the same in one important
way: no matter what happens, none of it is real. To chase illusions, to choose
illusory goals, is to go nowhere; and to go nowhere is to waste the precious
gift of life. 

## Unfulfillment
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

There is no condition in this world that is wholly satisfying and complete. All
conditions and circumstances here are temporary, incomplete, and incapable of
bringing you real fulfillment. How can that which is partial and changeable, as
are all experiences of this world, ever bring lasting or deep satisfaction to
the one who is whole, complete, and changeless? Nothing less than the return to
Wholeness will ever satisfy you wholly. 

The partial and limited nature of the ego self is a self-imposed limitation on
your experience of yourself. To deny your Wholeness, which is the purpose of
the worldly identity, will only bring you unhappiness and suffering. Your
identity in separation is the root cause of all your suffering for it is the
fact of separation from God that is fear and suffering itself. This fact is
simply replicated in many different forms, yet is every form of suffering
simply an expression of the condition of separation. Separation from God, from
your Creator, is your one and only problem, the root cause and source of all
perceived suffering, lack, and limitation. 

When the egoic identity fails to satisfy you; when you began to recognize the
inherent futility of being a body in ceaseless pursuit of satisfaction, the
mind will began to open in a new direction. The honest recognition of the lack
of meaning and fulfillment in your life, will inspire you to question deeply
how you live and why. If you seize this moment, this opportunity, refusing to
go back to sleep, the possibility will open before you to find another way to
live, a way that is meaningful and true. This is the beginning of the journey
back to your real home in God. 

## The Desire for Truth
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

What can bring you lasting peace and hope of healing all that brings you pain
and suffering but yourself? There is no cause of pain and suffering outside
your mind, and the solution must be where the cause is. You are both the
problem and the solution. Nowhere else can they be found. The world is but your
attempt to obscure this fact, and keep the idea of sin and guilt alive that
they be seen as if outside of you. If you realize no one but you can affect you
in any way, the appearances of guilt and sin you see all around you collapse
into the nothingness they have always been. Only your mind can affect you and
determine the condition you are in, even in this world. All power is given unto
you but you have misused it to miscreate hell and turn you back on Heaven.
However, you can turn your back on hell and return to Heaven anytime you
choose. Everyone will make this choice in time so why wait? To wait is to
prolong the time of needless suffering. You can begin the journey home right
now in this present moment. All that is required is the sincere desire to do
so. The Holy Spirit will respond to all sincere aspirations for Truth. 

The only requirement for Truth is a sincere desire to attain it. Given this
desire, willingness will develop over time. The willingness to heal the mind of
all that obstructs Truth, the willingness to meet Its conditions, will grow and
strengthen and carry you home. Your home has been waiting for your return since
time began, and it will wait until time is no more and all waiting ended. There
is no waiting in Heaven for waiting is of time and Truth knows only the eternal
now. 

While you dream of time and change and things not yet come, your true home will
be unknown to you; waiting for a future still to come will seem to be a fact of
your experience. Your return does not wait on time but on your readiness. In
any one moment you can be lifted up, and time will be left behind forever. What
is left behind is only what is no longer needed. You must learn to travel
light, to lay down the heavy burden of unnecessary thought, of limiting and
false beliefs. These serve only to weigh the mind down and obscure its natural
freedom. There is no way to fly if you are weighed down by the heavy burden you
have carried for so long. The mind’s natural inclination is to soar through the
Heavens, yet it cannot unless the chains that bind it to the earth are broken. 

Loose your mind from all it ever believed; let everything go that you have
taught yourself, all your beliefs, conclusions, and assumptions. Nothing that
you have been taught is true or useful on the spiritual journey. All is
illusion, folly, false and limiting. You must let it go that your mind may
become able to receive the Truth. 

## Holiness and Action
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Will what you do help you or hurt you? Does what you do to others help or hurt?
Do you act with Love, from Love, or from fear? Do your relations with your
brothers take place in the Light of the Self or in the ignorance of the self?
All selfish action will hurt you no matter what the apparent motivation. To act
from the position of ego identification is to deny yourself the help you really
need. 

To function from the understanding that comes from trusting the Holy Spirit, is
to assure yourself of real benefit that will result from your actions; all who
are affected in any way by your decisions will also benefit. There is nothing
that you do, think, or say that does not affect everyone and everything. To be
aware of that fact is wisdom; and to live, to act, for the benefit of all is to
bring Holiness Itself into all you do. 

Holiness is what you are, the nature of your Being. You cannot be other than
what you are. Dissociation from your real nature is the human condition, but
this condition is not natural. Sure it is that in the world of seeming
separation, Holiness is not apparent, being covered over by the refusal to
love. Its absence is sorely felt for when Holiness is lacking, suffering will
take its place. In fact, the absence of Holiness is suffering. When what is
most holy marks your life through its influence, no real suffering is possible.
In the presence of what is sacred, illusion loses its hold, allowing Truth to
prevail. 

## Only the Self
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Only the Self is real; all else that appears before your eyes is but the
projections of mind: empty imagery without reality or substance. It is the
taking of the world of appearance as real that lies behind all problems. What
appears as an image in a dream cannot affect you in any way unless you forget
that you are dreaming. The dream is very convincing in its effects, yet it is
you who give it the power to deceive. If you remember that all life in
separation is but a dream, that only God and His Creation are real, you are on
your way to freedom. To recognize the bars that hold you prisoner are of your
own making is the first step towards freedom. You need not break through the
walls that seem to confine you; you need only recognize their unreality and you
are free to go. The jailer guarding the walls all along was only your own mind.
Only your thoughts keep you a prisoner to what does not exist, and only your
thoughts will set you free. 

Whenever the temptation to be as you are not arises in your mind, remember
this: to be something other than what you are in Truth, will always lead to
fear, pain, and suffering, and a deep sense of emptiness and despair. Only by
being your Self can you find real fulfillment and return to freedom. 

To live life as a body, an exile in a strange land, is the fate of those who
refuse to question what they have been taught as reality. So long as willful
ignorance blankets the mind, shutting out the Light, so long will you languish
in a place that is not your home. While you refuse to raise to question the
nature of the world you see, you remain its willing prisoner and will suffer at
your own hand. It is your hand alone that is raised to strike, no matter from
where the attack may seem to come. Forgive your brothers your sins and take
back from them your demand they strike you down to punish you for what you have
done. You have done nothing that calls for punishment. Only in dreams of
madness could you believe such a thing. Lay down your weapons, end the war
against yourself once and for all time. As you lay down all of your defenses,
you will discover that nothing can threaten or disturb you in any way. 

