---
ref: "Chapter One"
title: "Salvation"
---

Whenever is the time, and wherever you are is the place to find Truth. Truth is
not somewhere else far away, a something that must be diligently sought. It is
closer to you than your own heartbeat. There is no distance that separates you
from the Truth at this very moment. How can there be a gap between Truth and
illusion, between what exists and what does not? The ego would have you believe
such a gap exists, for the ego must maintain a sense of separation in your
mind, a belief that you are separate from the Truth here and now. Thus must
Truth be a future goal to be reached, waiting always somewhere far ahead, never
immediate or present. To live in time and bypass the present by projecting a
future result, is to be an ego whose real concern is to maintain separation and
postpone the realization of Truth indefinitely. 

The awakening to Truth is the disappearance of the ego, the sense of a separate
self. A self that is separate from the world and everything in it, seemingly
complete in itself, is in fact the denial of the Self created by God, and a
very effective defense against it. 

Do you understand salvation, what it is and its requirements? Salvation is the
freeing of your mind from the effects of its errors of thought, the correction
of all false ideas and beliefs and the subsequent transformation of experience.
Salvation is the process of spiritual awakening. What must you do to be saved?
Do you want to be saved? Surely you realize that to attain a goal, you must
desire it, have some understanding of it, and make an effective and consistent
effort to reach it. Some discipline is always required to accomplish anything
in the world of form. 

Salvation is the purpose of *A Course in Miracles*, the goal towards which the
mind training is directed. Its purpose is accomplished through the healing of
the mind, the correction of all error that the mind be empty, ready, and able
to receive the Truth. The mind that has accepted, has attained salvation, is
free of fear and resting in the Self. Now it can offer salvation to all its
brothers, for salvation is accepted for all and freely given that it may be
shared. 

What has as its purpose the liberation of the mind from all bondage, from the
tyranny of the ego and the darkness of ignorance, cannot but succeed for its
purpose is total and uncompromising. All the Power of God is contained within
the desire for salvation. That is the only desire arising from the mind of
separation that is whole and true, and has as its aim to leave illusion behind
forever and return to what is only true. This desire, this inspiration to
return to your Father, is the gift of the Holy Spirit, Who has been holding it
for you since time began. He joyfully offers it to you when you are ready, and
through your acceptance is salvation assured. When may be unknown, the
circumstances not yet clear, yet through your sincere desire for salvation, it
is given you. 

What is the price to be paid for salvation? Only the giving up of what was
never true. The release of all attachment to fear, sin, and guilt. The
relinquishment of the need to attack and defend, to suffer and die. Can this be
a sacrifice? Letting go of all limitation, of everything that ever caused you
pain? Is the return to a real state of sanity, joy, happiness, freedom and
Love, anything but highly desirable? 

If you could truly see the state you are actually in without confusion and
denial; if you could see what salvation offers you, you would not hesitate one
moment and salvation would be immediate. The lack of clarity in your mind, the
as yet undeveloped ability to discern truly what is in your highest interest,
keeps you a prisoner to the past, to the ego, by your own choice. Whether
conscious or unconscious, it is a choice that governs your life and determines
its conditions. The necessity of learning to choose differently by learning to
think differently, is why the process of salvation must work itself out in
time.

## Learning
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Learning is a necessary condition of life in a world of time and separation.
Learning is an ability you invented as a part of your mind’s capacities. Yet
when learning proceeds under the Holy Spirit’s guidance, according to His
purpose, it is used to undo illusions, to learn in an entirely new way;
learning is used to set you free rather than to imprison. Repetition is an
essential learning principle. Without it, learning cannot be achieved. However,
repetition takes place in time and prolongs the need for time. The ability and
necessity to learn is fundamental to the mind of perception. Without it, a
world cannot be constructed and maintained. When perception took the place of
knowledge, it became necessary to undergo a learning process to correct
perception that knowledge may return. Although learning does not exist in the
condition of knowledge, learning is needed to reduce uncertainty that you be
made ready for the return of knowledge. When the Holy Spirit has guided you to
learning’s end, it is needed no more, and in the state of mind beyond all
learning are you made ready for Truth’s return. 

Your mind must be taught rightly in order to go beyond all learning and
perception. Your formidable ability to learn must be understood in the Light of
Truth, and used for Truth’s return. All that has been learned in the past, the
ego’s thought system and its values, all that you have taught yourself, must be
recognized as false that you may let it go and leave your mind open to receive
true ideas. 

Real learning is a process in which the falsity of your mind is undone, and the
learning of what is true takes place. Illusion cannot be long maintained when
you refuse the lessons it would teach you. To choose Truth, and to devote all
learning and teaching to meeting the conditions under which Truth can return,
is the only use of your learning ability in this world that is truly useful,
and the only learning goal that is meaningful.

## Problems
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

What is the answer to all your apparent problems? You have no problems but one:
separation from your creative source. Every problem you ever had, have now, or
will ever have, arises from and is a form of this one error. In reality, you
cannot be separate from God as you live, move, and have your Being in Him. Yet
in dreams where you seem to be separate from all you experience, does this one
error, this belief in what could never be, seem to take many forms. Each
problem appears with its apparently unique characteristics, and seemingly calls
for its own solution. And indeed, in a world of form, will solutions to
problems be specific to each one. 

Yet is the content of every problem the same, no matter how it appears. It is
illusion. And the solution is always the same: a miracle offered you by the
Holy Spirit in your mind to correct your wrong perception. This fact makes all
problems, no matter the appearance, equally easy to resolve. The forgetting of
this fact leads to belief in a hierarchy of illusions, with some more ‘real’
and thus more difficult to overcome. There is no order of difficulty in
miracles, thus there is no hierarchy of illusions. All are healed with equal
ease if they are given to the Holy Spirit to be replaced with miracles. 

When miracles are all you want, all your problems will vanish, for you will no
longer need them. The recurring ‘problems’ and conflicts of human life are but
the symptoms that follow the fundamental error of misidentification. To
identify with the ego and the thought system of separation, is to choose the
guide to pain, suffering, and disaster. When you ask the ego to make your
decisions, the state of peace that is your true home is all but forgotten. How
can that which was born as a faulty response to a problem that did not exist,
do anything other than create more problems that do not exist? As it was
created, so it will create. It cannot do otherwise. Yet are its creations just
imagination with no basis in Truth.

## The Cause of Suffering
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

What is needed above all else is the recognition of the cause, the source of
all apparent troubles that afflict you. The failure to recognize the source of
pain and suffering will simply perpetuate it. Without correction, will problems
continue to multiply and never will there be an end to them. They are, every
one, simply the results that follow your fundamental error. 

You are not an ego, a separate self confined to a body, fighting its way
through a hostile world, condemned to trudge wearily across a barren landscape.
You are in no danger except from your own mistaken thoughts. Your fear and
guilt haunt and pursue you, seeming to threaten your peace and well being.
Projected outwardly, they appear as if apart from you, malevolent forces poised
always to attack. Human figures, situations, and events that seem to cause
suffering and loss, simply embody your beliefs about yourself and give
expression to your wishes. 

Perhaps the hardest thing to understand, to accept, is your complete
responsibility for what you see and experience. Nothing happens to you against
your will. Nothing is forced upon you. Everything but reflects your wishes
until you decide otherwise. You are the dreamer of the dream in which you find
yourself. In that is your freedom and your salvation.

## Forgiveness
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

What if what you think you did to yourself and others had no effect on anyone?
In truth, nothing in the world of illusion is happening at all. The actions
themselves and the effects they seem to have are but part of the dream. To
forgive yourself and everyone and everything through the recognition that there
is nothing to forgive in the world of dreams, is to set yourself and the world
free from all thoughts of sin and guilt. Only the guiltless are forgiven for it
is only they who forgive. When you are unwilling to forgive, you cannot
receive. You are forgiven through the act of forgiving your brother. Through
this are both forgiven, and both are set free to be themselves. 

There is no time to waste for the world is tired; all who live here have grown
weary, bent low under the heavy burden of sin and guilt you have laid upon
them. Now is the time to forgive the world that you may be forgiven and set
free at last to return to your home in Heaven. While you languish in chains,
the world is not free. While the world suffers your guilt, you remain in
bondage to sin, suffering, and death. You and your brothers rise or fall
together; all are joined in the One Mind. No one can be free while he keeps his
brother in chains. 

Nothing is more important for you to do than to forgive. All else pales in
comparison. The entire Plan of Atonement rests upon the willingness to forgive.
Love will heal your wounds and set you free, and forgiveness is the most
comprehensive form of Love in the world of separation. Through forgiveness is
the edifice of sin and guilt that upholds separation undone forever, and you
are set free to return to God’s Kingdom. Nothing can compare to the joy you
will feel on that day. 

Whenever you are tempted to withhold forgiveness, remember who it is you are
forgiving. Always and only are you forgiving yourself, for it is your ‘sins’
you see in your brother. It is your guilt for which he stands condemned. To
forgive your brother is literally to forgive yourself. You cannot love your
brother unless your love yourself; you cannot love yourself without loving your
brother also. This circle of Love has no beginning and no end for it extends
forever. All are included in its gentle and merciful embrace; no one is left
outside. 

Loose the world by the act of forgiveness and forgiveness will rest upon you
and you will be free. Freedom is a gift from God and must be shared in order to
keep it. When you are free, you will see that freedom belongs to all, and you
will grant all your brothers the right to live freely. You will deny no one
what rightly belongs to them, and God will give you everything that belongs to
you because He gave it to you in your creation. 

Whatever the cost of freedom, you will pay it. There is nothing in this world
that can come between you and freedom except your refusal to meet its
conditions. The condition of freedom is surrender to Truth, for freedom is not
an illusion and cannot be found there. Only in your relationship to Truth can
true freedom be found. What is incapable of being bound in any way is free by
its very nature. In the awakening to and as the Self, is freedom revealed as
the very condition of your Being. 

What is most important to remember is always to include your brother’s welfare
in every decision you make. Remember that decisions are never made in
isolation; every one affects the whole. The power of God’s Son is always
expressed for the Whole Sonship. If you would be aware of the power given you
by God in your creation, you must recognize that it can only be used in the
service of all of God’s Creation.

## The Center of Being
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

What is necessary to discover within yourself is the still, deep center of your
Being where the Self abides. The Self has never left you though It disappeared
from conscious awareness. Your mind, the mind you experience as you, shines by
a light that is not its own, the Light of the Self. Eventually you will be able
to follow that light back to Its Source. If you would do this, you must become
disciplined in your mind through a mind-training such as found in *A Course in
Miracles*. An untrained mind can accomplish nothing for it lives in a state of
chaos, at the mercy of the many conflicting thoughts and impulses that drive
it. Never will you know peace and happiness until your mind is free of the
insanity that has gripped it since time began. 

The Christ Light has as its purpose to illuminate all the dark places in your
mind that you would keep hidden. All the secret hates, the deeply cherished
grievances you hold against your brothers, the dark memories of sin you would
forget yet not let go; all that you would conceal from the Holy Spirit must be
exposed to the Light of forgiveness that it be healed. These sins, this proof
of guilt you cling to, are like a deep sickness that poisons your mind and
prevents true healing. 

What you are unaware of, what resides in your mind below the threshold of
conscious awareness, exerts its influence nevertheless. The energy of mind must
be free to return to Light. The mind must be free of false ideas and free of
the contraction imposed upon it by fear, for these obstruct the mind’s natural
freedom. All falsity, and in particular all grievances, hide the Light in you
and act as heavy weights that tether the mind to the earth when it would soar
through the heavens. The mind must be emptied of all that holds it down and
prevents its freedom of movement. Whatever else you do to heal the mind, and
there is much to this process, you must release the ancient, deep seated
grievances and hatred that have held you a prisoner to fear for so long. 

Fear and unforgiveness are always found together; where one is, there will the
other be also. To forgive unconditionally is to reject fear in all its forms.
To replace grievances with the expression of Love will ultimately heal all fear
until only Love remains. When once again Love is all you are, will freedom be
restored and the Kingdom will be yours. Do not wait on time or waste it in idle
pursuits while pain and sorrow follow not far behind. Let us hasten to return
to our Father, our Home. He is waiting for your return; this is what you really
seek, what you desire with all your heart. 

All the seeking of this world is but the misguided attempt to find, to recover
what was never lost. The deep fear and emptiness within your mind is the
driving force behind all your seeking; the dim recognition that something is
lacking, that fulfillment is necessary, is the thought that begins the search.
This thought, though barely conscious, is nonetheless what gives reason and
direction to your activities. Yet is it partial and incomplete, and the effort
that arises from it is misguided and ultimately leads you nowhere.

## Goals
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

All the things you seemingly want to accomplish, the goals you find so
important that dominate your life, all of these are but substitutes for what
you really want. Your heart cries out for meaning, for true purpose. In a world
that seems to be separate from you and unaware of, even indifferent to your
existence, the frightened mind must seek shelter and purpose through its
activities. By keeping active, in constant motion, it feels secure in its
accomplishments and safe from the intrusion of chaos. Whatever goals you may
have are highly esteemed, their nature matters not, for it is your goals you
depend on to give life meaning and purpose. In truth, it is not the goals you
want but the experience they bring. A state of happiness, of fulfillment and
peace, is what you seek. 

To feel worthy of being loved is the impetus that impels you to seek accolades
and the approval and admiration of others. You believe that if others, be they
many or just certain individuals, approve of and admire what you do, then is
your worthiness demonstrated and proven. Thus is the recognition accorded you
by others, the criterion by which your worth is established. There is no
shakier or more uncertain ground upon which to rest than the fickle and
constantly changing opinions of the ego. Your worth has been established by God
and has nothing to do with the world of form. 

Whichever goals you may seek are meaningless unless they are shared by the Holy
Spirit. He alone knows if they are part of your one true goal, or if they
hinder it. The true goal of every life is to awaken to the Love, freedom, and
Unity, that is the Self. In your awakening is everything included, and the
entire world brought closer to the end of time. True healing is never limited,
it includes all. 

Teaching you to change your mind about what you value and believe is the
functional purpose of A Course in Miracles. What you value, and the beliefs
that support and arise from your values, are directly responsible for the
conditional circumstances and the direction of your life. Your life is a direct
expression of the attempt to fulfill and attain what is valued. The line along
which your life develops is established by the goals you choose, and these are
determined by what you value and what you value negatively, what you wish to
avoid. 

Whatever the goals you choose, you will build your life on them, for goals
express purpose and purpose is what holds your life together. Purpose can be
expressed or unexpressed, conscious or unconscious. If you are not conscious of
purpose in your life, then it is certain that you are following the ego’s
purpose no matter what the appearance. The ego will always choose purpose for
you; it has a constant purpose and never falters in its dedication to that
purpose. All thoughts, all feelings and desires, the impulses that spur you to
action, all have one purpose and overriding aim: to maintain the sense of
separation and the specialness that is its reward. To this end, the ego will
use everything in your life for nothing escapes its notice or its need to
control. 

