---
ref: "Chapter Fifteen"
title: "Lessons"
---

We will conclude this supplementary teaching with a series of practical
exercises whose purpose is to train and focus the mind. Each exercise is a
lesson on an important theme or idea whose aim is to help bring about deeper
understanding and, if possible, direct experience of the Truth which the idea
represents. 

There are twelve lessons given, each with very specific instructions on how,
when, how long, and how often to do them. It is suggested that each lesson be
done daily for one week. A total of twelve weeks of practice is thus required
to receive their full benefit. It is recommended that you stay with the one
lesson a week for twelve weeks guidelines, each done daily without missing any
days if possible. Both the weeks’ duration of practice for each lesson, and the
completion of all twelve in order, are needed to achieve the maximum positive
effect. 

Those readers who are students and teachers of *A Course in Miracles* will
recognize the similarity of these lessons to the lessons in the workbook of the
Course, and they share the same goal: to help bring about direct spiritual
experience that will ultimately return your mind to the Self, the Christ, that
is What and Who you are. 

Let yourself be guided as to whether you do these lessons or not. As has been
previously stated, the lessons, like this teaching as a whole, are intended to
support and supplement *A Course in Miracles*. For those who are not
practitioners of the Course, the lessons can be a good introduction to some of
the ideas presented in the Course, and may inspire you to take up the study and
practice of *A Course in Miracles*. May all who read these pages and do these
lessons, if so guided, find the spiritual help that is always waiting and
available to those who truly desire it.

<hr>

## LESSON 1
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

### Forgiveness Will Set Me Free
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Sure it is that the world does not understand real forgiveness or its results.
To the worldly mind, forgiveness is a gift from you to your brother, often
unmerited, given out of the goodness of your heart. Yet deep down there remains
the memory of the grievance, and the bitterness that is a part of it. 

Real forgiveness arises from a very different understanding; always it is based
on the recognition that your brother deserves it, no matter what the ‘crime’.
To truly forgive, you must accept that whatever the appearance, your brother is
not guilty, for in a dream no one is really doing anything to anyone. In your
dream last night in which you were perhaps threatened or attacked, made to
suffer loss, did that really happen? Did you suffer loss or injury? If the
figure in your dream was someone you know, when you awoke, did you blame him
for what was done while you were dreaming? 

The world you see in the ‘waking’ state, is just as much a dream as your
nightly dreams. As in sleeping dreams, all you see around you is the projected
imagery of your own mind. You assign yourself a role as you do with everything
that appears, and whatever happens is what you have asked for. In dreams, no
one is guilty, for nothing that seems to happen is real. 

Simply put, this is why neither you nor your brothers are guilty. You are not
bodies nor are you what the body appears to do and say in dreams. All are
worthy of complete and total forgiveness. Only through this understanding and
acceptance, by putting this into practice always, will your mind be healed of
its belief in your guilt. 

The terrible stain of guilt hidden deep in your mind, keeps you a prisoner of
fear for guilt demands punishment. You must project the guilt and the need for
punishment onto the world around you, for the pressure and discomfort within is
unbearable. Through this constant projection do you relieve temporarily the
inner pain, but never do you actually release or heal it entirely. Like a
swollen wound that is periodically drained to relieve the pain it is causing,
yet is the wound never healed for its cause is left untreated. 

The only cure for what ails you is to renounce guilt entirely in all its forms,
wherever it appears, no matter the circumstances. Deny that anyone is ever
guilty. Forgive yourself and everyone and everything; only then will Love
return to reclaim your mind and set you free from fear and guilt. 

This exercise, like the ones that follow, will have two parts. The first part
should be done twice a day, morning and evening. It can be done one or two more
times each day if you feel comfortable, but do not overdo it. If there is a
sense of strain or tension, you are overdoing it. 

As soon as you can after waking in the morning, sit quietly where you will not
be disturbed. Repeat the idea for the day several times silently to yourself
with eyes closed. Completely relaxing your body, let all tension go. Follow
this by relaxing your mind also; let the sense of inner awareness be calm and
untroubled. Let go all thoughts of the future or the past, letting the mind be
silent. Then, without straining, without a sense of struggle, gently search
your mind for examples of unforgiveness. Any slights or hurts remembered,
anyone you do not like, or any situation that causes you anxiety or discomfort,
are all good candidates. For each one that arises to awareness, pause for a few
moments and feel your unforgiveness. It may be slight irritation, anxiety, or
even strong anger or rage. It does not matter. If there is any upset or
negative feeling, there is unforgiveness. To each example of unforgiveness say: 

In this situation regarding ______________________, forgiveness will set me free.

Fill in the blank with the person’s name or the situation you are forgiving.
Remember you are not only forgiving your brothers, you are forgiving the world
and all situations, events, and circumstances that upset you. Where there is
upset, no matter the cause, forgiveness is needed. 

If the practice is going well, you should feel a sense of release, of relief at
the conclusion of the exercise. Start with three to five minutes, no more. As
the week progresses, you can increase the length to eight to ten minutes if you
feel comfortable. If you seem to run out of examples, sit quietly and repeat
the lesson for the day slowly to yourself. When examples occur that need
forgiving, go back to the exercise. Remember to do it slowly, with no sense of
hurry or strain. It is particularly helpful, if you can, to feel the upset that
needs forgiving for a few moments, then repeat the lesson and move on. Repeat
this exercise again in the evening. Always begin by reading the entire lesson
including the exercise instructions. 

During the day, remember the lesson frequently, several times an hour if
possible. Close your eyes and say it silently to yourself. Be sure to use it in
this form immediately if anything upsets you: 

Forgiveness will set me free from this.
{: .center}

<hr>

## LESSON 2
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

### Judgment Will Bring Me Only Pain
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Today’s idea, if truly understood and accepted, will free you from the awful
burden of judgment you have laid upon yourself. You think that to judge another
is your right. That it will bring you benefit, and help you set the world right
by offering correction where it is needed. The world does not need correction,
being the effect of your own thinking. Correction does not deal with effects;
it must be applied to their cause. 

Judgment is a weapon you use against your brother. What you do not realize is
that this weapon is really directed at yourself. You think you can judge your
brother without harming yourself, that you will escape the effect of your own
condemnation, for to judge is to condemn. Do not forget the principle of
salvation: whatever you give, you give yourself. Always this is true regardless
of person, situation, or circumstance. This can also be stated thus: Whatever I
do, I do to myself. All doing, no matter the apparent object of action, has its
desired effect on myself though that may not have been its intent. There is no
evading the effects of any action I may take. 

As to judge is to condemn, and to condemn is to attack, all judgment, though
meant to be an attack on my brother, is an attack on myself. The purpose of
attack is to inflict harm; I will receive the pain that was my intention to
inflict on my brother. If you were aware of this, truly believed and accepted
it as fact, you would give up judgment altogether. No one would persist in
doing what clearly causes him great pain. 

There is an additional price to be paid for careless judgment. Being an attack
on another, it cannot but increase my sense of being guilty. The guilt in my
mind must be healed if I am to return to Truth. Every judgment I make is an
attack on Truth, an attempt to delay salvation, and a needless prolonging of
pain and suffering. Clearly I gain nothing from judgment despite my belief to
the contrary, and through the projection of judgment, I lose everything of real
value including peace of mind. 

Judgment is the function of the Holy Spirit Who alone has the knowledge to
judge truly. His judgment on the Son of God does not change. God’s Son is
forever guiltless, innocent, and loving, and deserving of his Father’s Love.
Turn all judgment over to Him and cease this attempt to usurp a function not
your own. It was the attempt to usurp a function not your own that led to a
world of illusion and all the misery it contains. Lay down this sharpened sword
you hold against your own throat. 

Today we will attempt to do just that. Two or three exercise periods of ten
minutes each are suggested. As usual, it is best to do one in the morning, one
in the evening, and one in between if you are so motivated. You can shorten
this time if you find yourself feeling uncomfortable. 

Sit quietly to begin with eyes closed and body relaxed. Repeat today’s idea
silently several times. Then calmly and without strain, search your mind for
situations, people, and behavior where you are accustomed to judge. If you look
honestly, you should have no difficulty finding examples of judgment. Look
calmly at each example, briefly reviewing your reasons for judging, then say to
yourself: 

Judgment will bring me only pain. \
It is not my function to judge.
{: .center}

Then move on to the next. After some minutes of this, stop and sit quietly for
a few moments. Say the idea for today silently two or three times. Then go on
gently searching your mind. Conclude the exercise by again repeating today’s
idea slowly two or three times. As you go through your day, try to remember
today’s lesson frequently, several times an hour at least. Do your best not to
go a long period of time without repeating today’s idea. This regular
remembering has a very beneficial effect on your mind and strengthens your
commitment to Truth. If you find yourself in judgment of anyone or anything,
stop immediately and remind yourself: 

Judgment will bring me only pain.
{: .center}

<hr>

## LESSON 3
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

### All That I See Is In My Mind
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Upon first glance, this statement surely seems to be but madness. In the
forgetting of the role you play in making and maintaining the world, it does
appear as if there is something there before you, apart from you, beyond your
control and functioning according to its own laws quite independently of your
existence. Experience brings conviction, whether it be of the Truth or
illusion. 

Do not rest content with the belief in the reality of experience in separation.
What you experience here is what you have chosen to be your reality; your
experience then ‘proves’ it real. Everything you see represents your belief in
and commitment to separation. All apparently different forms and forces are but
variations on the one belief in separation. You choose what you want to
believe, then send perception out to witness to its reality. It is but the play
of imagination, fueled by desire, nothing more. 

Today we will try a different approach. We will let reality be what it is, and
use perception to discover what is true. All perception is illusion, even the
unified perception of the vision of Christ. Yet does Christ’s vision show you
the reflection of Truth in the world of dreams. Thus is perception brought so
close to knowledge that knowledge can flow across the little gap between them,
and restore your mind to Truth. 

Your mind is not in your body, your body is in your mind as is everything you
see and experience. The world you see is the projected imagery of your mind,
nothing more. It does not exist independent of your mind; it cannot for it is
your invention. Today we will try to have the experience of the
non-separateness of all things. We will try to take an important step that will
begin to show us the Unity that is our Mind and Being. 

Today’s exercise require three practice periods of six to eight minutes each,
one in the morning, one in the evening, and one in between when it is
convenient. Begin by sitting quietly with eyes closed, in front of a window if
possible. Repeat today’s lesson silently to yourself once or twice. When you
are ready, open your eyes and slowly look around the room. As your glance
naturally falls upon a certain object, say slowly to yourself: 

This chair is in my mind. \
This book is in my mind. \
This wall is in my mind.
{: .center}

Look around unhurriedly and avoid deliberately picking out what you would see.
Do not choose anything in particular and do not exclude anything. After you
have looked around the room for a little while, close your eyes and repeat
today’s lesson. Then open your eyes, look out the window and repeat the
exercise, looking slowly around. 

This person is in my mind. \
This tree is in my mind. \
This house is in my mind. \
This fence is in my mind.
{: .center}

And so on. Again, no deliberate choosing; just repeat to yourself that whatever
object you see is in your mind and do not deliberately choose or exclude
anything. After looking at a number of objects, close your eyes and slowly
repeat today’s lesson several times. To conclude, sit quietly and let your
thoughts bring to mind persons or events. To each one say: 

This person ____________________ is in my mind. \
This situation involving ___________________ is in my mind.
{: .center}

Be sure to name them. Finally, open your eyes and say the lesson one or two
times slowly followed by this reminder: Nothing that I see is separate from me. 

During the rest of your day, each hour, remembering as often as you can, close
your eyes and repeat the lesson slowly. Then open your eyes, slowly look around
and repeat it again if the situation allows. If you can, do both parts of this
exercise. If you cannot, merely do it with closed eyes or open eyes, one or the
other. Set your intent to remember. Tell yourself you are doing something very
important and beneficial. Try to remember. Please try. We are attempting to
open your mind to the fact that it is not contained by the body or limited in
any way. Your mind is everywhere.

<hr>

LESSON 4
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

I Am The One Self
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

The idea of One Self that is the Self of all, does not make sense in a world
where everything that appears seems to be a form, an image, separate from other
forms and complete in itself. Each one thus appears to be a separate self;
there seems to be an almost unlimited number of selves, each separate and
different from all others. Such is the world of illusion, in which those who
would be separate from their Creator and their Self, come for a little while to
pretend they are what they are not until they tire of their childish game and
turn their minds toward Truth. 

There is One Self that is the Self of all; It is not affected by the apparent
confusion of those who would forget. Yet the awareness of It has been lost to
the sleeping mind. Is there a greater tragedy than this? To lose the awareness
of what you are, Its Love, Its peace, and wander alone in a strange and barren
land, populated by many isolated figures, each as lost and alone as you. If you
could but realize the enormity of your loss, you would rush back to the Self. 

The One Self is what you are. In It, you are joined with God and everything
created. Even now you are still the One Self, joined with everything you see or
think of. As the Self, you are Spirit, Mind, Love, and Light. Nothing in your
experience here can ever take the place of your One Self. Happiness cannot be
found in separation from the Self. The Christ is happiness and joy. You need
not seek for them outside yourself. Only by returning to the awareness of the
Self will happiness and joy be restored to you. 

The exercises for this lesson will be a little different from what we have
attempted so far. All that you need is already deep within you. We will attempt
to reach That which is our only Self. In That lies our salvation. When once you
actually experience your One Self, doubt will vanish and certainty will take
its place. Do not allow doubt to hinder your progress along the way. Doubt is
one of the weapons that ego uses against the Truth; it will not prevail against
your single purpose. 

For the longer practice periods, begin as usual by sitting quietly with eyes
closed after taking a minute or two to deeply relax mind and body. Two practice
periods are recommended of about ten minutes each, one in the morning, one in
the evening. Begin by saying silently to yourself: 

I am the One Self. \
My Self is always with me. \
Today I would reach my One Self.
{: .center}

Then let your awareness turn deeply within. Let it sink past all the thoughts,
the steady stream of unnecessary noise that usually fills your awareness. Sink
deeply into your mind below the steady chatter of superficial consciousness.
Let your attention, your sense of self awareness, gently sink until you feel a
sense of stillness and depth. Rest quietly there. Let your mind be open,
receptive, not doing anything, simply resting as awareness itself. If thoughts
come, do not pay attention to them. Let them come and go like shadows, passing
across the surface of mind. Rest quietly beneath and beyond them, and let the
One Self reveal Itself. If you should become distracted by thoughts moving
across the mind, simply let them go, relax again and return to resting in
simple awareness. You need do nothing; simply be present, open, rest and
receive. The Holy Spirit will do the rest. 

If you are doing the exercise well, you may feel a deep sense of stillness, of
silence. You may feel a depth, a place in your mind that is completely empty,
yet filled with strength and Presence. Or you may simply feel a sense of peace.
Even if you do not feel anything in particular, this exercise is still very
beneficial, and you may be sure you are receiving the benefits. When your
practice period is over, quietly come back, gently open your eyes and repeat
today’s lesson once more. Sit quietly for a minute or so before you get up and
go about the business of the day. 

The shorter practice periods should be frequent throughout the day. Remember as
often as you can; you will gain much thereby. If you can, close your eyes and
repeat today’s idea, and spend a minute or so in silence. If that is not
possible, just repeat the idea silently to yourself.

<hr>

LESSON 5
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

My Brother And I Are One
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

In the world in which you see yourself, your brothers appear to be separate
from you. Like you, they seem to be bodies that walk and talk and move about,
each with his own thoughts, goals, and aspirations, that are for him alone.
Joining, except in the most superficial way, is clearly impossible in such a
condition. The mind that believes in separation thinks it is part of the body,
and is unable to see that in itself, it is something entirely other than a
body. So long accustomed to identifying with what you are not, to being limited
to a particular location occupied by a body, you do not know the limitlessness
and freedom that are yours. 

Your Mind extends everywhere and contains everything. Though your brother
appears to be separate from you and you from him, this is but a choice you
make, not a fact. Your mind and his are continuous, unseparated by the bodies
that your eyes see. If you would have him be separate, that will be your
experience. If you would recognize the Truth and overlook what the body’s eyes
see, your mind will be freed of its false containment and will extend
everywhere. By learning to see with the mind as it truly is, you will
understand that nothing separates you from your brother; he is in you and you
are in him. You and your brother are One, joined in the One Self that is God’s
Holy Creation. Nothing separates you, even in the dream, unless you want it to
be so. 

Today we try to turn these words into experience, for it is through experience
that conviction comes. The Oneness that is you and your brother, is not so
difficult to reach if you are willing. One longer practice period of about ten
minutes is required for this lesson, preferably at the beginning of your day.
If that is not possible, any suitable time will do. 

Begin by sitting quietly with eyes closed. After relaxing body and mind, repeat
today’s idea silently to yourself three or four times. If you notice any
resistance in your mind to repeating today’s idea, stop and go on to the next
phase of the exercise. With no sense of strain and no attempt to search for
anyone in particular, sitting quietly and attentively, let the name or image of
someone in your life rise to awareness. Hold this brother gently in your mind
and say silently to yourself: 

My brother ______________ and I are One.
{: .center}

Fill in the blank with the name of the person you are addressing. Repeat this
idea once or twice, then let the mind go blank until the next person appears in
your awareness. If no one occurs to you, sit quietly and repeat today’s idea
once or twice, then wait. If you feel resistance to including a particular
brother in your Oneness, stop for a moment, take a deep breath, relax and try
again. If resistance still arises, stop, relax, and go on to the next person. 

Anyone whom you would exclude is someone you do not want to forgive and thus
extend your Love to. It is particularly helpful in these cases to release the
resistance if you can, and include them in the exercise. If you cannot, do not
fight with yourself but move on. You can try again the following day if you are
willing. It is very important to do this exercise in a relaxed and unhurried
manner; do not struggle or force yourself. Conclude by repeating today’s idea
slowly several times. 

In the shorter practice periods which should be done frequently throughout the
day in all kinds of situations and circumstances, two variations are suggested:
take a minute and merely repeat today’s idea slowly and silently to yourself
once or twice with eyes closed, then wait in silence for a short time before
you open your eyes and go about your day. Alternate this if you will when
feasible, by looking at a brother who is in your vicinity and saying silently
to yourself: 

My brother ______________ and I are One.
{: .center}

If you don’t know the name, just use the original idea. Then smile and move on. 

We are attempting with this exercise to take a giant step towards the day when
you will indeed directly experience the Oneness you and your brother share. You
may even, during the practice periods or in between, have a glimpse or a short
experience of no separation, of Oneness. Be very grateful if this occurs, for
it means you are drawing near to the goal of awakening.

<hr>

## LESSON 6
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

### To Hear God’s Voice I Must Listen
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

To be told that to hear something I must listen, seems too obvious to need be
stated. Yet it is the obvious that is obscured and covered over by the
complexity that burdens and clouds your mind. How often do you really listen to
anything that is said to you? Too often is listening marred by inattention, by
a distracted and wandering mind. The untrained mind has very little control
over itself. Much time is spent lost in the wandering and constantly changing
movement of  thought that is unceasingly active. To listen well, no matter to
whom, requires that attention be stable, that you be self aware. 

To listen inwardly is a different kind of listening, just as being aware
inwardly is a different use of awareness. It requires a quietness of mind, a
stability and openness that must be learned. To actually be willing to hear the
Voice for God requires keen interest, sensitivity of mind, and the intention,
even if partial, to receive guidance. This implies a measure of trust, and the
recognition that help is needed. The motivation to hear God’s Voice must come
from you. You must make that decision, just as you decided long ago to listen
to the voice of separation, the ego, and you have been faithful to that
decision ever since. 

To learn to listen to the Holy Spirit, and be willing to receive His
communication and act on it, is an important and fundamental step on the road
to freedom. Today we begin to practice taking that step. No one can take it for
us; it is our decision alone. 

Begin today’s exercise by sitting quietly for a minute or two with eyes closed,
completely relaxing the body and letting the mind become quiet. Two formal
practice periods are required, morning and evening as usual, of about ten to
twelve minutes each. When you feel relaxed and receptive, begin by repeating
today’s idea quietly to yourself two or three times. Allowing yourself to relax
deeply in body and mind, rest your sense of attention in awareness itself,
completely open and receptive. Let your awareness sink deep into the stillness
that lies beneath all the surface chatter, the unceasing busyness of the mind.
Rest in the stillness and without strain or effort, listen inwardly. What is
needed is a still and quiet mind, sensitive to the movements within it. If you
feel your mind wandering, becoming busy with extraneous thoughts, relax again
and repeat today’s idea once or twice, then return to the exercise. 

If you are doing this well, you may feel a sense of contact with something deep
in your mind, or a subtle feeling may arise that may translate itself into
thoughts you can hear. If you are very receptive and ready, you may hear a
gentle, still, small voice. Listen to it carefully. You may continue this
exercise longer if you feel moved to do so and have the time. Conclude by
repeating the lesson for today. 

To hear God’s Voice I must listen.
{: .center}

For the shorter practice periods, as often as you can remember, close your eyes
and repeat the lesson silently to yourself. Then wait quietly for a minute, or
whatever amount of time you have, for God’s Voice to speak to you. You cannot
remember this idea too often. What you are trying to do is very important and
very holy. You are trying to open the communication channel to God’s Answer to
the separation and every problem you may perceive in your life. You will
succeed if you try sincerely with an open heart and mind, and persevere till
communication is attained. The Holy Spirit is always communicating with you,
ever ready to help. You must simply open the channel at your end. The Holy
Spirit is in your mind, and nothing is more natural than this communication.

<hr>

## LESSON 7
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

### The Love Of God Is What I Am
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Sure it is that I am Love, created by Love to be Itself. God is the Source of
all Love; there is no Love but God’s Love. Through the extension of His Love I
was created, and through the extension of Love, I create. God created me to
extend His Creation. Love is the motivating force through which everything that
is real is created. Nothing exists that does not have Love as its Source. Love
is what I am, what I have been, and what I will always be. In that, I have no
choice. 

Yet in the world I have invented to take the place of Truth, Love is absent,
banished by my choice of fear, and appearing only in sickly forms limited by my
unwillingness to give. Fear has become the great motivator driving behavior and
determining the conditions of human life. How can that which I have invented as
substitute for what God created, assume Love’s role and drive It from my mind?
Only in dreams could this be so; if dreams are my reality in separation, then
fear is real and Love is absent. 

The dream world of separation was made real in my imagination through the
choice of fear and the rejection of Love. To reverse this error, I must reject
fear and return to the Love in which I was created. Today it is my intent to
begin to feel the Love hidden deep within me, and to choose that Love over the
fear that darkens my mind and makes happiness impossible. 

For today’s lesson, three exercise periods are recommended, one in the morning
soon after waking, one in the evening shortly before retiring, and one in
between at anytime that is convenient. Each should last approximately eight to
ten minutes; you can take longer if you are comfortable and feel so motivated. 

Begin as usual by deeply relaxing mind and body while sitting comfortably in a
quiet, undisturbed place. With eyes closed, repeat today’s idea silently to
yourself two or three times. Then, in a calm, unhurried manner, search your
mind for situations in which you have acted unlovingly. The form of unlove does
not matter, just the fact that love was absent is enough to warrant correction.
Briefly review each situation in your mind but do not linger too long on any
one example. Say slowly and quietly to yourself: 

In this situation involving _____________, I chose fear, \
but I would choose Love instead. \
The Love of God is what I am.
{: .center}

Fill in the blank with a brief description. Then go on to the next example.
Sometime during this exercise, pause and let your awareness sink deep within.
Gently try to feel the peace and Love of God within you. If you feel something,
something that seems real, stay with that feeling until it fades. Then go on as
before. Conclude the exercise by repeating today’s idea quietly to yourself
several times. 

Today’s lesson should be remembered frequently as you go about your day. If you
can, close your eyes and stay with it for a minute or less. Let this idea
permeate your mind and fill you up. If you are in a situation where this cannot
be done, merely repeat the idea slowly and silently to yourself. Try to feel
the truth of it. You are Love, created in the image of God. You are merely
trying to experience the Truth within you, the Truth that is you.

<hr>

## LESSON 8
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

### I Am The One Light
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Within you is the One Light that illuminates the universe. There is nothing
this Light cannot do. It can heal all pain and sickness, erase all sorrow, and
end all suffering. The Light within you can lift you up to Heaven; It is the
same Light that shines there. 

In this world, you do not see this Light for It is denied entry. Like Love, the
Light must be denied in a world of separation built on fear. Fear excludes the
Light as surely as it excludes Love. The Light, like Love, is One and
all-inclusive, a part of all that God created. Yet what is One and given to all
cannot enter where giving is partial and limited. 

To a world shrouded in darkness, the Light comes to shine away all that is
unreal. All who live in separation long to see this Light. It still lives in
everyone as a tiny point of Light unseen beneath the heavy veil of ignorance
that covers it. Your brothers look to you to show them the Light of Heaven.
They have forgotten It long ago. You must bring the Light to all those lost in
the darkness of despair and misery. But first you must reawaken It in yourself,
until It shines so brightly that all sin and ignorance dissolve in Its
Presence. 

In the real universe that lies far beyond all illusion, all is Light, for only
the creations of Light are real. This Light can be reflected here in the minds
of all who love Truth, and would give all assistance possible to their
brothers. You are a Light bearer, you who have chosen to serve your Father’s
Great Plan. But first you must awaken to the Light within you, that your mind
be healed of the darkness of sin and guilt. As your mind is purified, the Light
within shines more and more brightly, until It goes before you, illuminating
the path you must walk. From your mind can this Light be rekindled in other
minds, spreading from one to another in a long line of transmission, until the
whole world stands revealed in the One Light. 

Today we take a giant step in this direction as we turn our attention to the
Light within us. It cannot be difficult to reach that which has always been a
part of us since we were created. We need only try with firm determination and
the certainty given us by the Holy Spirit. 

Two practice periods are recommended for today of about ten minutes each,
though you may do more if so inclined as the week unfolds. It is best to do one
in the morning before you start the activities of the day, and one in the
evening after you conclude the days’ activities. 

In a quiet place free from distractions and disturbances, say the lesson to
yourself three or four times silently with eyes closed. Try to say it slowly
and with conviction. The Light is in your mind and today we will try to reach
It directly. Relax your body and mind completely. Turn your attention within,
and let your awareness extend itself deep within, past the constant activity of
thought, past all worldly concerns, deep, deep within. Let it rest in the deep
silence that prevails in the depths of your mind. Rest there in a state of
quiet attention; let thoughts come and go, without giving them your attention.
If you remain quiet, resting your attention in awareness itself, the stream of
passing thoughts will slow down and will not distract you. 

Have no expectations or ideas of what to experience. Just rest in awareness;
quiet, attentive, and open. If you are ready, you may actually see a Light with
your inner vision. It may be brief or It may last a short while. It may even be
very bright, like an inner sun. You may feel something like a force, a
movement, a vibration, like a kind of energy. This experience may be very
subtle, or may feel very bright, or you may feel nothing but a sense of peace
or deep relaxation. Whatever you experience is good. End the exercise by
silently repeating the lesson again three or four times.

Throughout the day, repeat the lesson frequently to yourself. Try not to let
long periods of time go by without remembering. Frequent repetitions are more
helpful than you realize. Close your eyes, say the lesson slowly to yourself
once or twice, then go on with your day. Remember, the One Light shines within
you as you.

<hr>

## LESSON 9
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

### Only God Is
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

The lesson for today is liable to bring up resistance in one form or another.
There is nothing more threatening to the ego than today’s idea. The ego’s
purpose is to replace God; thereby it thinks it secures and maintains its
existence. The absurdity of this belief, that a cowering and frightened little
idea of existence, can by arrogance and bluster replace the Creator of the
universe, is apparent to any sane mind. 

However, the mind lost in separation is not sane. Crippled by fear and
distorted by false purposes, it believes and adheres to the most fantastic
ideas with which it has replaced Truth. Foremost is the belief that something
not created by God, Who is the Source of all that is real, can exist. This
belief is closely tied to the idea that I am responsible for my own creation.
If I create myself then I am complete, and need answer to no one nor follow
laws I did not make. This is what you believe when you usurp authority that is
not yours. All the madness of this world then follows. Selfishness, greed,
judgment, guilt, sin, attack; all these and more proceed from the insane idea
that you created yourself, and are justified and entitled to do whatever you
please without concern for others. All the laws invented to regulate human
behavior, are attempts to control the chaos resulting from this authority
confusion. 

Truth is not affected by chaos and confusion, nor has God been dethroned from
His role as Creator of all that is. You who live, move, and have your Being in
God, cannot be apart from Him except in dreams of madness. Everything that is,
cannot be apart from Him. Ideas leave not their source; everything created is a
Thought in the Mind of God, and still remains where it has always been. 

Today’s idea is why the world you invented is but idle dreaming. It is why fear
and separation, sin and guilt, pain and suffering, do not exist. They were not
created by God and invested with His Being, therefore they are not real. Only
what God has created exists, and what is not created by God does not exist.
Only what lives in Him, in Truth, is. Therefore we say: 

Only God (Truth) is.
{: .center}

For the practice of today’s idea, one longer practice period of about fifteen
minutes is recommended. If it is going well, you can extend it a little longer.
If you encounter resistance or discomfort, shorten it accordingly. Begin by
sitting comfortably with eyes closed. Put a little smile on your face and say: 

Only God is. \
Only Truth is.
{: .center}

Repeat this slowly to yourself three times. Then sit quietly and let thoughts
relating to your life, its conditions and problems, pass through your mind.
State each condition or problem briefly in this form: 

This _______________ does not exist in God, therefore it does not exist at all. 

A suitable list of thoughts might be: 

This house does not exist in God. \
This problem with _______________ does not exist in God. \
My conflict over ________________ does not exist in God. \
My fear about _______________ does not exist in God. \
This sickness _______________ does not exist in God.
{: .center}

Do not limit your thoughts to what may be considered negative. Include neutral
or even positive references. 

My new car does not exist in God. \
This snowstorm does not exist in God. \
My coming trip to ____________ does not exist in God. \
This sidewalk does not exist in God.
{: .center}

Be sure to follow each example with: 

Therefore it does not exist at all.
{: .center}

After several examples have been considered, repeat today’s idea. Then move on. 

Spend half of today’s practice period with this exercise, then stop and sit
quietly. Repeat today’s idea and let your mind be still. See if you can feel a
sense of vastness, or of Light unlimited. Perhaps you will feel peace, or a
deep sense of relaxation. In any case, sit quietly and let Truth come. If your
mind begins to wander, repeat today’s idea once or twice, then return to
stillness. 

For the shorter practice periods which should be done once or twice an hour,
close your eyes and repeat the idea for today. Then spend a minute or so in
silence, letting Truth be. If you are not in a situation where this can be
done, simply repeat today’s lesson slowly once or twice, eyes open or closed.
That is enough. Open your mind and heart to Truth today. Let your Father’s
Voice speak to you.

<hr>

## LESSON 10
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

### I Live In God
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

To the mind lost in the darkness of illusion, today’s idea makes no sense. In
fact, to the mind of ignorance, asleep to the reality of its own Being, this is
madness, a thought not even worthy of serious consideration. In the midst of an
experience of life characterized by fear, misery, and chaos, subject to pain,
suffering, and death, any thought of God does indeed seem superfluous. The mind
of separation does not realize it has banished God from its world, and fears
and hates its Creator. How otherwise could the world you see have arisen unless
God was absent from the mind that invented it? 

Today we attempt to bring God back to the world that thought it could expel
Him, and expunge even His memory. God is not mocked. He is still everywhere and
in everything forever. He cannot be absent from your world because He is in
your mind and you still abide in His. Actively kept from your awareness
however, He cannot be experienced nor can you receive His help until you change
your mind. 

The Holy Spirit’s goal is just this change of mind, that you be made ready and
willing for your Father’s return. The mind must be purified and emptied of all
that obstructs the awareness of God’s Presence. The fear of God that lies deep
in your mind, must be brought to the Light of awareness and released, that the
way be clear for the reunion of the Father and the Son. 

We will take a big step today towards the time of that reunion. What is
important for the success of this exercise is the awareness that you are
attempting something very holy. You are attempting to reach your Father, the
Creator of all that is, and welcome Him back to your awareness. We will not let
old ideas of fear or unworthiness interfere with our single purpose. We will
remember that we are His Creation, a part of Him that can never be separated.
Our holiness mirrors His, all that we are is His gift, and we have no life but
what we share with Him. God is not far away from us; He can be reached if the
mind is clear and quiet and the heart sincere. 

For today’s longer practice period, fifteen to twenty minutes is recommended.
Make sure you are in a place that is very quiet, where you will not be
disturbed. Remember who you are and your real relationship with your Creator.
Put aside all worries, considerations, plans; let all extraneous thoughts go.
Sit comfortably with eyes closed, body relaxed, and breathing slow and even.
Repeat today’s idea slowly and gently to yourself several times. Let your mind
be completely open and receptive. Gently turn your attention inward and let it
rest in the core of your Being, in the heart of you. In the silence and
stillness of Being, rest quietly without effort. Let be what would be. If you
are disturbed by extraneous thoughts, repeat today’s idea slowly several times,
then return to silence. You need do nothing, just allow what needs to happen to
occur. If you are doing today’s exercise well and are ready, you may feel a
sense of deep peace, or happiness, perhaps even a feeling of subtle presence.
In any case, no matter what happens, today’s exercise sincerely done, will help
pave the way for the return of the awareness of God’s Presence. 

For the shorter practice periods which should be done several times an hour or
more, close your eyes and repeat today’s idea slowly and with feeling. Try to
get a sense that this is not just an idea, this is true, a fact of your
existence. Spend a minute with eyes closed, feeling the Truth of what you are.
If you cannot, due to circumstances or time constraints, just repeat to
yourself quietly: 

I live in God. \
And I am glad that is so.
{: .center}

<hr>

## LESSON 11
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

### What Do I Really Want
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

This is the question that is seldom asked in a way that illuminates the mind
that asks it. The mind of separation seldom asks itself questions that would
induce serious consideration of motives or the values on which they are based.
Typically, you see something that attracts you be it a person, situation,
activity, or thing, and you react to that attraction. There may be some
consideration of the goal in a superficial way, but your response to
attraction, to desire, is automatic and self justifying. Seldom is it seriously
examined or understood. 

Why do I want it is never asked. To do so would require a serious examination
of values, and what they are designed to hide. The sleeping mind does not want
to disturb its comfortable slumber. The many wants and desires you have, have
very little to do with what you really need. And what you really need is what
you really want. 

Today we will attempt to uncover what you really need. When that question is
answered, you will know what you really want. In truth, to want and to need are
the same. To bring them together as one will make salvation possible. All the
things you think you want are but a smoke screen to keep what you really need
from your awareness. Their result is the continuation of a life based on
illusion, chasing shadows with the ego as your guide. 

For today, one longer practice session is recommended, preferably at the start
of your day. If that is not possible, whenever you can find the time will do.
Start this exercise of fifteen to twenty minutes by sitting quietly with eyes
closed. When you feel relaxed and ready, repeat today’s idea to yourself, then
watch as your mind responds with a long list of things that have no meaning.
Let all your desires, all your wanting of what you think you do not have, of
what you think you need, be revealed. Do not censor or resist, but let all
wanting, regardless of its nature, present itself to you nakedly. You may, for
example, experience thoughts such as these: 

I want a new ____________ . \
I want a better relationship with ____________. \
I want to achieve ____________.
{: .center}

Fill in the blank appropriately. It does not matter what the nature of the
desire, let it come up. After each example, ask yourself this question: 

Is this what I really want?
{: .center}

You may find as the exercise progresses that this question will make you
uneasy, for it is asking you to look deeply at what you value and give
importance to. You are questioning part of the foundation of your life, that
which gives it meaning and purpose. If uneasiness occurs, stop the questioning
process and sit quietly for a minute, then resume the exercise. If discomfort
persists, discontinue and sit quietly, eyes closed, for the remainder of the
exercise period, watching your thoughts and letting them go one by one. If
uneasiness does not persist, continue with the exercise. When no more examples
are forthcoming, ask yourself once again: 

What do I really want?
{: .center}

This time, try to go beyond the more superficial level of answers and let your
mind reveal itself. Listen carefully to what you hear. Your deepest yearning is
for peace, happiness, and Wholeness. You want to love and be loved, not
partially but completely. Deep within, you long to be reunited with your
Father. You long to know once again His Love for you and your Love for Him. Do
not be concerned if you are unable to receive these deeper answers to your
question. By doing this lesson, you are taking a significant step in their
direction. The real answer to your question will be given you, perhaps now,
perhaps later. It is the answer you really want, the only answer you truly
need. For the shorter exercise periods which should be done throughout the day,
once an hour at least, close your eyes and ask once again: 

What do I really want?
{: .center}

Then spend a minute or two in silence waiting for the answer. It will come.

<hr>

## LESSON 12
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

## God Is My Only Need
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

No one living in this world realizes there is only one need just as you do not
realize there is only one problem. Fulfilling your only need is the solution to
your only problem. The Truth Itself is very simple. It is the ego, the mind of
separation, that is complicated and convoluted. The many problems arising from
complexity and confusion cannot be solved on the level on which they manifest.
They can only be resolved on the level from which they originate. The mind is
the origin of all problems. Its belief in separation gives rise to all the
problems you think you have. As long as the belief in the reality of illusions
persists, your life will be marked by a constant parade of problems that call
for a response. As soon as one situation is resolved, another will arise to
take its place. And so it will go, on and on until you are ready to recognize
the single nature of what appears as many. The one problem you have is
separation from God, your only Source, and thus separation from the Truth of
what you are. If the one problem is thus one of lack, then the answer is to
fill that lack. 

To return to God is your only need. In Truth, you have never left your home in
your Father, yet in a world of dreams it does seem as if He is absent from your
experience. Your experience then becomes one of lack and loss, and the constant
struggle to find and keep what you seemingly lack, and prevent the loss of what
you think you need. In this condition, peace and happiness will elude you, and
fear will be your constant companion in one form or another. 

There is one solution to all that ails you; it is the one thing you really
need. God is your only need. When you return to the full awareness of His
Presence in you, the direct knowledge of your real relationship with Him, the
world and all its problems will vanish, and you will be again as you have
always been. 

Today, with the exercise we do, we will take a step towards conscious reunion
with our Father. Our longer practice period of fifteen to twenty minutes can be
done at any time during the day when convenient, although using it to begin the
day is best. While sitting quietly with eyes closed, repeat today’s lesson
slowly and clearly to yourself several times: 

God is my only need.
{: .center}

Sit quietly and let the truth of this statement dawn on your mind. Let your
mind go deep, beneath the surface consciousness, beyond the flow of thoughts
and images that dominate it. Let it sink into the depths where peace and
stillness prevail, where the memory of your Father waits but for the
opportunity to return to your awareness and set you free. 

In the shorter practice periods which should be done throughout the day,
several times an hour if you remember, close your eyes briefly and repeat the
lesson silently to yourself: 

God is my only need.
{: .center}

Try for a few moments to feel the truth of this. Let it penetrate your mind.

