---
ref: "Chapter Twelve"
title: "Two Answers"
---

Do not make the mistake of not taking your life seriously. Life is not given
you to spend in idle pursuits, chasing after pleasure and fame. The most you
can accomplish in such a life is to keep fear away from conscious awareness,
and the idea of death suppressed. Stimulation of all kinds, goals to be
achieved, and the collecting of possessions and accomplishments, do nothing but
fill your time and provide the illusion of meaning. The meaning of life does
not lie within the limitations of bodily existence. Within that narrow context
of living and experiencing, all activity has but one purpose: to keep God away.
It need not be so. All the activities of your life, mundane or otherwise, can
take place within a frame of reference that is meaningful, and will bring real
happiness. For that, a change of mind is necessary; a change of focus,
perception, and understanding. 

Everything takes place in mind, in awareness. All of your life is a play of
consciousness. The essential point is this: where do you direct your awareness?
How do you conceive of yourself in relation to life, the world, and ‘others’?
What do you value above all else? All of these questions are really the same
for they all arise from the original and most basic question: What am I, and
what is the purpose of my life? Your answer to that is your life, and all of
its conditions and circumstances are determined by the answer you have chosen. 

There are only two answers to this fundamental and all important question. One
answer is true and one is false. Sure it is there appears to be many, even an
almost unlimited set of possible answers, yet that is just the confusion
engendered by the many apparent forms that experience takes. Do not let the
multiplicity of forms confuse and cloud your mind. That is their purpose, yet
can you look beyond form and see the content the form conceals but represents.
The content of all form, all activity, all experience, all thought, feeling and
perception, is always and only one of two possibilities: Truth or illusion.
Thus the answer to your question is always a choice for Truth, for your real
identity and a life of true meaning, or it is a choice for illusion, the
illusory self identity you have invented, and a life based on what has no
meaning. 

Which answer do you prefer? Life, and all its conditions, are always the result
of choices you are making, though in both general and specific ways, that is
not apparent to you. You think you have simply found yourself in a world not of
your own making, into which you were born without any consent on your part.
This forgetfulness and lack of recognition of total responsibility for your
life in all its details, is a part of the dream. Ignorance allows the dream to
continue unquestioned, with you playing the role of helpless pawn at the mercy
of forces beyond your control. As long as you prefer the role of ‘victim’,
however you may choose to glorify or grapple with it, you will be choosing
illusion and meaninglessness. 

Let’s make a clear, simple, and unmistakably accurate declaration: you are
always doing exactly what you want to do. Always it is your choice that
determines thinking, feeling, action and reaction. Though you may seem to be
acting under duress, or forced to act against your will, you are nevertheless
responsible for the conditions that seem to be forcing your choice. Hence you
are still responsible for your decision. You would not react at all to the
events of your life if you remembered you were dreaming. Your responsibility is
total. In that lies your salvation. 

Will you choose salvation by accepting Atonement for yourself, or will you
choose to wander off awhile down the paths that lead nowhere? Even then you
will be brought back eventually to the only choice that can be made. Why waste
time? Choose now or choose later; one choice arising again and again, appearing
as many due to the illusion of time, yet always one, always the one and only
choice that can be made. The content of all you do, think, or experience, is
either Truth or illusion. This is inescapable. In that is our salvation, for
what could be simpler than to choose always, no matter the appearance, between
two alternatives? And of these two but one is real. Please remember this,
remember this always. 

Only that which is real has any lasting significance for your life. All else,
no matter how valued and esteemed at the time, will pass away and be no more.
This includes your body which is not your home, but is rather a temporary
learning aid, a means to learn and teach the Truth. Real communication is the
body’s only function as the Holy Spirit sees it; therefore it is the body’s
only function in truth. Use the body as He would have you use it, and its
health is assured. If you do not misuse the body by assigning it roles it
cannot fulfill, it will serve you faithfully as long as you have need of it. 

Do you know the purpose of your life? The purpose of life, which is its meaning
also, should be the foundation from which you live. Without a foundation, a
real purpose, life becomes empty and meaningless. There are not many different
purposes as the ego would have you believe. Chasing after various purposes,
trying to find the one that is ‘right’ for you, is the way to avoid facing
life’s only real purpose. The ego encourages you to do this, assuring you that
purpose is yours to decide. Do not believe this. It is no more your role to
assign life a purpose than it was your role to create yourself. The One Who
created you and all life, has given that life its purpose. 

Your role is to learn this purpose from the Voice for God, accept it fully, and
build your life on that sure foundation. The purpose of life in this world is
to return to God. The act of separating from Him, followed by a conscious
decision to forget, resulted in your present condition of separation from all
that is real. Separate from God, you have no real purpose though you have
invented many. All are meaningless. You must return to Truth in which all
meaning is found. The only purpose to be found in a world of separation is the
escape from illusion and the return to what is real. 

As has been so often stated in A Course in Miracles and this teaching, you
cannot do this alone. God has given you the Answer to the dilemma you are in,
and you must accept It if you are serious about restoring your life to what is
meaningful. Let His Answer guide you in the ways of Truth. You do not know
Truth from illusion; this you must learn and learn well. The sure understanding
and recognition of the difference between them is absolutely essential. You
will not learn this all at once; it takes time, perseverance, and consistent
effort. If you truly want to learn, and apply yourself to the process, refusing
to give up no matter what happens, you will learn what is needed and it will
set you free. 

Now is the time to devote yourself to doing what must be done. There are
certain requirements that must be met in the journey back to God. They cannot
be bypassed or ignored for the mind of separation, the self you have made, must
be undone and all that is false corrected. Though the way the journey unfolds
is highly individualized, the same corrections must be made and all the
conditions of Truth must be met by all who would awaken. You cannot bargain
with God nor evade His laws, and you cannot bargain with the ego in any of its
forms. The ego must be renounced, its thought system undone, and all traces of
its hold on your mind must be healed and released. 

Do not try to make decisions on your own but let yourself be guided in all
things by the One Who knows the way. He will lead you surely through every
pitfall, past all resistance that arises in your mind, and give you the
solution to all problems you may encounter. There is nothing you cannot do with
His help. You cannot fail if you deeply and truly, with all your heart and
mind, want only to be the Self created by God once again. If your purpose be
strong, dedication unwavering, and your willingness reinforced and augmented by
the Holy Spirit, you will gain the Kingdom. 

The only thing you need do on your own, and even here you have help, is to turn
over decision making to the Holy Spirit. This decision is only yours to make,
and it must be repeated many, many times, for it is a process of surrender that
proceeds gradually over time. Decide that you will not decide for yourself, but
ask for His guidance in all things. The more consistent you are with this, the
more quickly will you reach the goal. Nothing is more important than to
consistently do, in all areas of your life, what you are guided to do. You may
be asked to do something you do not understand. Do it anyway. You may be asked
to do something you do not want to do. Do it anyway. You do not perceive your
own best interest, but there is One Who does. He will guide you unerringly
through all the dangers and obstacles that seem to block your path. He has the
answer to all difficulties, the solution to all problems. 

If you are to realize your true Self condition in this life, you must desire
this above all things. Anything you would accomplish takes much time, effort,
and right application of your mind in the learning process. Unless you strongly
desire to achieve a result, you will not be willing to devote the necessary
time and energy. To realize the Self is the only goal worth devoting your life
to. Unlike all other goals, it must become the central focus of your life, and
all other aspects of life must be arranged in right relationship to this goal.
In other words, the other aspects of life must not hinder or obstruct, but
rather support the accomplishing of spiritual awakening. 

In truth, most of the factors of worldly life as is commonly lived, have as
their purpose to conceal or deny spiritual reality by maintaining and
reinforcing the experience of separation. This need not be. Much of what you
have invented to take the place of Reality can be reinterpreted by the Holy
Spirit and used instead to help bring about the ending of separation. You must,
however, be willing to accept His interpretation, and learn how to use the
factors of your life in a new way. To give something a new function which
includes a different purpose, requires that it be used differently. This means
learning. 

Life in the world of separation demands constant learning due to its constant
changes and often bewildering complexity. You have taught yourself to live as
something you are not in a self invented context called the world, and in a
condition that is the opposite of Truth in every way. This is a gigantic
learning feat that establishes your remarkable ability to learn when you are
motivated. You have learned your way into the condition you are in, so you will
have to learn your way out. 

This process requires you to ‘unlearn’, to let be undone all you learned
before, that you may then learn what is true. The Atonement is an undoing, a
correction of false thinking and perception that Truth may take its place,
leading to a transformation of mind. Learning was invented to take the place of
knowledge. Learning is variable and what you learn constantly changes.
Knowledge is invariable and changeless. Learning is uncertain, knowledge is
always certain. When you learned to be something you are not, knowledge was
banished from your awareness. 

The purpose of learning is to bring you to the end of learning that knowledge
may return. When learning has accomplished its purpose, it is needed no more.
Until then, you must learn, and learn well, all the lessons the Holy Spirit
teaches. He will present you with true ideas, concepts that are expressed in
words, yet are pointing to that which lies beyond the reach of concepts. Truth
must be directly experienced; the purpose of conceptualizing about Truth is
only to send you in Its direction. Your direct experience of what is real will
bring conviction; and the Truth, when fully experienced, will free you from the
bonds of earthly life. 

To do what is necessary, you must first know what it is. You do not understand
the way that leads out of illusion or what is required. A blind man cannot find
his way out of a maze. He needs someone who stands above the maze, who sees the
whole picture, to guide him to the exit. I am not exaggerating when I liken
your position to that of a blind man. The mind of illusion is like a maze in
which you are trapped. The maze is guarded by the ego whom you have chosen as
your guide. The ego directs you so as to go round and round in circles, that
you may not escape the maze, for its existence depends on it. 

The first step out of the maze is to let go of the guide who helped you build
it for the purpose of keeping you trapped forever. This is the obvious thing to
do, yet is the obvious often the most difficult, due to the complexity and
ignorance of the mind of illusion. So long identified with the ego mind,
thinking of yourself as the body that houses the mind, you do not realize the
absolute shift in identification that is required, nor do you have any idea of
how to go about it. This is why the Atonement is an undoing, not a doing. As
the ego, you are always involved with doing, hence the necessity of shifting to
undoing. 

The ego’s thought system must be undone thought by thought and its dark
cornerstone, the belief in sin and guilt, must be healed. The fear which
underlies and pervades its entire thought system, must be uncovered and
recognized in all its forms. This requires time and consistent help from the
Holy Spirit. The process of undoing can be painful at times, even disorienting,
but you must go through it until you come out the other side. To stay where you
are is also painful, though pain is often masked as pleasure. The pain of
spiritual awakening, though intensely experienced at times, will come to an end
and suffering will be no more. The pain of continuing bondage is unending. 

To attain salvation, what is false must be given up entirely. All false
beliefs, all values rooted in nothingness, all commitment to illusion in any
form, must be renounced that Truth may take up its rightful place in your mind
once again. Do not think you can keep the illusions you like and have Truth as
well. To hold on to any illusion is to keep all of it. Illusion opposes Truth
in every way. This will never change for illusions were made to take the place
of Truth. One or the other, but not both, will rule your mind. 

Hold no exceptions to Truth as valuable, for Truth is one seamless Whole. Its
nature is to be all inclusive, without exceptions. Truth is all encompassing;
what is not part of Truth is illusion. Anything that seems to stand outside of
Truth is but projected illusion no matter how convincing the appearance or
experience. The Truth as God created It, is all that is real; nothing unreal
has been created by God, all that is unreal is not Truth and does not exist. 

Your desire for illusion in place of Truth results in appearances that are real
to you because you made them. Do not believe what your senses tell you; they
were made to show you what is not there. Nothing your eyes see is real despite
its appearance. A partial and fragmented perception will never allow you to see
what is really there. You can learn to see Truth reflected in the world of
illusion, if you are willing to let the unified vision of the Holy Spirit
replace the way you see now. 

All vision shows you the outpicturing of your state of mind. Through the body’s
eyes you see the projection of the illusion of separation and its consequences.
This picture of a ‘world’ is what you have chosen as your reality for so long.
Never has it given you safety or Love. Never has it given you peace of mind and
it never will. The world of separation represents the insanity that has gripped
your mind since that moment of terror so long ago. The world cannot but
outpicture the chaos, fear, and uncertainty, that characterize the mind that
has rejected its Creator. To reject God is to reject Love, leaving only fear to
take its place. Never have you seen the Truth reflected in this place of
desolation, and you never will through the eyes that were made to look on fear
only. 

Real Vision, the Vision of Christ, is the Holy Spirit’s gift to those who want
Truth, not illusion, and are willing to do what is necessary. Like all
perception, even the unified Vision of Christ is illusion, meant to last only
while it is necessary to fulfill a mighty purpose. There is one important
difference however, between real vision and all other perception. Through the
unified vision of the Holy Spirit, you see the Truth reflected in the world of
illusion. His vision shows you the Light that is in your brother and all
things. Unified vision is not knowledge, but it does not oppose knowledge in
any way, and like knowledge, it is whole. Thus it is close enough to knowledge
that it leads to knowledge and the end of perception. 

To see the Light in your brother is to see him truly. In that shining Light,
his innocence is reflected for you to see beyond the shadow of a doubt. The one
Light and the innocence of the Christ shining there are also in you; through
the willingness to see your brother as he truly is, you are able to see the
Truth in yourself. This the gift every brother holds out to you. Accept it
gratefully that you may be joined together as One, and together you will leave
the world of fear and separation. 

The present is the only part of time in which you actually live. This is self
evidently true as you clearly do not live in past time nor are you living in
future time. The present is the only moment in which you are actually here.
Yet, strangely enough, the present is the part of time that is least
experienced. If you were to watch your mind carefully, it would become very
evident that you are seldom fully present. Your thoughts fluctuate wildly and
unceasingly, absorbing your attention and diverting it from the present moment,
from here and now. There is no way to be fully present to any great degree
while you tolerate your wandering mind and let it dominate your awareness. To
be present is to be aware, not lost in thought.

The constant activity of the thought process has the purpose of preventing you
from being aware in the here and now. The untrained mind, stuck in a habitual
pattern of remembering the past and imagining a future, can live an entire
lifetime and never experience being fully present. Why is this so? 

The mind of separation is a restless, chaotic process of constant thought,
feeling, and impulse. Driven by unconscious fear and the need to get, to
acquire, it is always in motion, never at rest. With little or no understanding
of even its basic motivation, the mind is at the mercy of the past which drives
it, and the conditions that surround it. Its responses are determined by past
learning and associations that have become habitual tendencies through which it
expresses and reacts. There is little room for spontaneity or real learning,
both of which can happen only in the present. Such a mind is as good as dead as
it lives out the past and plans for the future; never is it fully alive in the
present, the only place it can be. To be alive is to live in present time,
leaving the past behind and the future open.

What if there were no such thing as time, as past, present, and future? What if
time were not sequential unless you imposed that order upon it? What if all
time were over and gone, and you were just living out a memory of events long
since vanished? This is actually what you are doing. Holding a memory in your
mind of a moment of time in which everything that could happen to you in
separation did happen, you are standing at the end of time, reviewing the
journey in your mind, imagining that you are making it again, and breaking up
time into past, present, and future. What happened simultaneously in that one
moment of time is now broken up into discreet events that you review one by
one, producing the illusion of a life lived in sequence from past to present to
future.

You are thus retracing your steps in a journey that was over and gone long ago.
Even what seems to you to have not happened yet, is past. If you have not yet
reached that point in your memory, your review, there appears to be a part of
time you call the future. Time is but illusion, a trick you play upon yourself.
In your hands, time is a way to prolong a journey that never happened, so that
life in separation can seem to continue into a far off, indefinite future.

The Holy Spirit has a better use for time. He can collapse time for you, and
bring the end to your imaginary journey much more quickly if you will cooperate
with Him. If you learn the lessons He gives you, and allow the correction of
your mind, time becomes less and less necessary, for its only purpose is to aid
your true learning. Eventually you will reach the end of learning; at that
point, time is needed no more and it will come to an end. All of life in
separation is the repetition of a journey that was never necessary. Due to your
belief, however, the journey must be made until you want and need it no more.
The sooner you realize its futility and become willing to let it go, the sooner
it will end in the return to Truth. 

Eternity intersects time in the present. The only moment of time that is real
is where your life takes place, even in the dream. To let your mind wander, and
keep your attention in the past or the imaginary future, is to avoid your own
life. Living through a screen of chaotic mental activity, threading your way
through the mass of egoic projections, is to spend life in a haze of
distractions. You cannot afford to let the tendency of mind to overlook the
present dominate your life; in so doing, you are assured of the continuation of
the fear and confusion that make happiness impossible and suffering inevitable.

Through the return to the present, you are brought face to face with your own
mind. Here is where it operates, now is when you can become aware of your mind
in action. To see it as it is, in its continuous activity, is necessary if you
wish to free yourself of its tyranny. Your awareness and attention are
dominated by the ceaseless stream of thought, feeling, image, and impulse.
While this is so, you are not free to experience your mind as it is, to
understand yourself to any great degree, or to change the way you think and
live. You are bound to an automatic and repetitive set of feelings and
responses determined by your individual past and the general egoic mechanisms. 

To return attention to the actual present and rest in awareness itself, is
essential. Be vigilant in your mind for God and against the ego. You have been
vigilant for the ego and against God. You must reverse this orientation, and
begin to choose Truth over illusion, God over the ego. The ego is the source of
the constant thought activity that so absorbs your energy and attention. You
must make the decision to take them back; only thus can you return to freedom.
There is no need to sleep walk through life, absorbed and controlled by what
appears on the screen of inner awareness. Take back your mind, take back your
attention. You will be amazed at what there is to discover.

To know your mind as it is, in its constant and unceasing activity, is your
responsibility. You think that to have a mind is enough to understand it. You
do not understand your mind; if you did, you would be free of the fear,
conflict, and confusion that dominate it and keep you prisoner to what you do
not understand. Your mind operates in a kind of automatic fashion, sweeping you
along day after day. Living within the rigid and automatic patterns that
dominate your mind, deprives you of real understanding and true freedom. The
mind of separation is a creation of fear whose purpose is to exclude Love. 

Love is not mechanical like the mind of separation. A mind operating as Love's
expression is free, spontaneous, and very alive. Always and only giving, the
mind of Love is not concerned with getting. Love is fullness itself; giving to
get as the ego does, is foreign to It. When your mind is filled with Love,
overflowing with compassion and goodwill towards all, you will realize that you
have everything. The motive to get, to take, to bargain, will disappear. You
will live in the quiet certainty that you have all you need. Why would you want
more than this? Contentment and gratitude for what you have, will fill your
mind with joy and peace. What need have you for more than this? 

"To those who have, much will be given." What does this mean? Those who have
the peace of God, who live in a state of Love, have become like an open door
through which the gifts of God may be given to the world. Those who truly have,
understand that the gifts they are .given are not for them alone. God's gifts
are for all, and must be freely shared if you are to have them for yourself.
God only gives, and what He gives is unlimited and all encompassing. That is
the nature of His gifts. To give away what you have been given, is the
recognition and acceptance of the gifts of God for what they are. Nothing can
be accepted except as it truly is. 

The ego cannot accept anything for what it is. Always it must control and
adjust, modifying everything to fit its perceived needs. In all your
relationships is this evident. You do not accept your brother as he is; you
reduce him to an image that pictures what you want him to be to you. To this
image, made up of what you want him to be, you relate. The image you make of
your brother always represents what you would have him be. It also represents
what you think yourself to be. 

The body is the basic image through which you think you live. From this image
you relate to all the other images that seem to surround you. You have
forgotten that you put them there for you to see. And so they seem real and
independent of you, able to affect you against your will. They must then be
controlled, not allowed to penetrate the defenses you have erected around your
mind. 

My brother, nothing can threaten or harm you ever under any circumstance. You
are not the image you have made. There is only Love surrounding you on all
sides. Your foolish defenses against what cannot attack, only strengthen the
fear in your mind they were made to protect you from. The one thing they do,
and do well, is keep Love away. That is their real purpose, to keep fear alive
yet seemingly under control. As long as fear rules your mind and drives your
behavior, Love will not be welcome. 

You do not realize that Love is total, without exceptions of any kind. You
think you can continue your allegiance to fear as motivator, and still have
Love. This is impossible. While it is true that Love penetrates even the dream
and makes its presence known, it is but a glimmer of what Love truly is. To
know Love as It is, as Itself, you must refuse to countenance fear in all its
forms, and choose Love as your only motivation. To choose Love only will lead
you inexorably to the practice of forgiveness. 

Forgiveness, not as the world understands it, but as it is in truth, is the
highest form of Love attainable on earth. Forgiveness is given to all
regardless of appearances; like Love, of which it is a part, its meaning lies
in its all inclusiveness. Do not question the value of forgiveness; it will
lead you back to God and perfect freedom. Without forgiveness, you are like a
blind man trying to judge what he cannot see or understand, groping his way
along through the darkness in which he lives. Forgiveness illuminates the
darkness of human life, shining it away while restoring your mind to Love. 

What in this world could offer you anything remotely as valuable as
forgiveness? It will undo the hell which you have made; a place of fear and
hatred, marked by conflict and sorrow, ending in death. Forgiveness will heal
your mind of the deep sense of guilt you have carried so long. It will relieve
you of self hate and the sense of unworthiness that drives you to project guilt
and the need for punishment onto your brothers. Forgiveness ends the dream of
conflict and pain, of lovelessness and isolation. It will bring you back to
where you belong, where you become a shining beacon, lighting the way for your
brothers to follow.

