---
ref: "19"
title: "Consciousness and the Father's House"
subtitle: "A message from Jesus, identifying himself as 'the living Christ who lives in you'"
---

## I. Be Aware

Beloved one, we are getting closer and closer to the essence of everything.
What joy it is to walk the path of wisdom together. What joy it is to live in
the uncreated truth. I thank you for listening to my voice and following it. I
thank you for answering my call.

Today I come to remind you of the importance of being aware of everything you
are, always.

This essential matter of being aware of your true self is what will make fear
disappear forever from your sight, reduced to the memory of an unpleasant
nightmare. Little by little the memory of fear will dissolve into nothingness;
time in its benevolence will make fear vanish and be impossible to remember. It
will be abolished into eternal oblivion because unconsciousness is not created
by God. I make this clarification so that you do not confuse the decision to
forget God, which unconsciousness sought to cause, with the eternal oblivion of
fear, which will happen in due time. The first was an unsuccessful attempt,
since nothing, no one, can really disconnect from God and continue to exist.
However, you can forget forever the nightmare of fear, caused by
unconsciousness, because that state was not created by God and therefore is
revocable.

Disconnecting from what you are can only arouse the panic that you experience
on so many occasions, a response to nothingness, to the conscious awareness
of nothingness, a disconnection from being. Experiencing nothing is
disturbing, for nothingness would literally be the death of the soul, if that
were possible. Given your experiences, you fear the world because you think the
world is where you lost your being. Thus you search for it there, and never
having found it in the world makes you distrust the world. But, my brothers and
sisters, the world cannot give you the being that you are or that you thought
you had lost.

To search and not to find was the way of the ego. To seek your being exactly in
the only place where you would not find it was a sinister trick that you
yourself created. Remember that the decision about where to look for your
being is always yours.

You cannot find your truth, your being, anywhere other than in yourself. And
since I am the truth, you can only find me. That is what was meant when you
were told to look for yourself in me. Only in the truth can you find your being
for the simple reason that you are the truth, the way and the life. There is no
other path than your being. There is no other life than the life of your being.
There is no other truth than the truth that you are. “Being what you are” seems
devoid of meaning since it is impossible not to be what you are. However,
this must be understood well. Being always what you are means not to disconnect
from anything that happens within yourself.

Feeling, perceiving, and experiencing everything that is happening inside you
now and always is what it means to re-unite your consciousness with what you
are—or rather, to gather your being in consciousness. This understanding of
consciousness is essential for your happiness. Consciousness is what makes
something. Everything is consciousness. Nothing exists outside of
consciousness. God Himself is pure consciousness, infinitely present. You
yourself are consciousness and nothing else.

## II. Heralds of Being

Love is consciousness. Fear is unconsciousness. Therefore, returning to the
Father’s house, which is the expression that refers to returning everything you
are to your consciousness, is something that anyone can do in a very simple
way. You return to the Father’s house, that is, to the loving consciousness
that you are, whenever anything that arises from your being is embraced in it.
Imagine consciousness as a great palace, built of the purest crystal, where the
heralds of being enter. These heralds are all that the being experiences or
creates within—feelings, beliefs, thoughts, feelings, emotions, everything.
The union of all these acts of being within consciousness is what unity is in
totality. Therefore it is the house of the Father, the Kingdom of Heaven.
Certainly that Kingdom has been spoken of correctly as a state of being. That
is what it is. The Kingdom of Heaven is not a place or, properly speaking, a
“state” of consciousness, because there are no states of consciousness. There
is only consciousness.

Judgment is a turning away from consciousness out of fear. Thus you are urged
again and again not to judge. Your true self cannot deny its totality but you
can deny part of it, and in doing so you deny your integrity. And since your
true self cannot stop being whole, once you deny an aspect of it, you perceive
a being that is not complete. You feel that incompleteness. This feeling of
lack of fullness is an unequivocal symptom that you have denied an aspect of
your being. In other words, fear comes to dwell in you even when you deny a
single feeling, thought, or perception.

Beloved, these last messages should cheer you. Today you can leave behind all
fear when you realize that all fear is a matter of identity. Fear is
unconsciousness; once you begin to accept that fear is unconsciousness of your
true self, you will inevitably take the next step, which is to become aware
that unconsciousness is simply the denial of something that you feel or have
felt in your heart, or what you think or have thought in your mind. This
knowledge is powerful, because it grants the understanding that you need not
heal the hurts of the past, nor project or plan a golden future of revenge for
a baleful past. None of that will achieve long-awaited security. None of that
will achieve the goal of living in certainty. We no longer need to search for
anything or anyone to address our fear.

Living without fear is only possible when you live in certainty. There is no
other option. Fear, which is always unconsciousness of being, makes an
appearance when there are doubts. This dynamic is simple, sequential, and
logical. Since all doubt is a doubt about oneself, the unconsciousness of being
is its cause. Doubt eliminates certainty and erases peace of mind. With peace
gone, conflict arises and with it fear. Given the energetic state of fear, the
soul begins to grapple with it, just as the body does with a toxin. It is a
natural reaction. Fear is so foreign and unnatural that the soul always seeks
to eliminate it. Fear is soul poison.

Can you begin to realize that it is entirely possible to walk in this world
without the slightest hint of fear? This is possible— and necessary. This can
be achieved today, when you sincerely acknowledge that everything you feel in
your heart and everything you think in your mind can and should be embraced
by your loving consciousness. By loving everything that arises within you, you
eliminate fear of yourself. By eliminating fear of yourself, you eliminate fear
of your experience. By removing it from your innermost self, nothing and no one
can make it arise again.

Never was there anyone or anything that caused your fear. Fear is manufactured
by the human heart—without touching the center of your being. Fear is something
foreign, and I use this word deliberately. Fear does not belong to you. It is
completely foreign to you. It is so external to you that even your being is not
touched by it. Fear does not accomplish anything. It never made a dent in your
soul. Thus when you eliminate the fear of your experience, and lovingly accept
all that you are now and always—then you return to experiencing the purity of
your virginal heart. That untouched state of being cannot be altered. This is
another reason for joy, since much of your confusion and fear comes from a
misunderstanding of the effects of fear. Fear never came from anything external
because the universe as a whole is neutral; it does not and cannot ever do
anything to you.

The universe is ours, the world is ours, and our brothers and sisters too.
Remember that the neutrality of everything is the truth of creation. God could
never have created a universe that could harm his sons and daughters at all.
And yet, does the rising of the sun affect you? It is evident that often you
experience a mood change as the sun rises or the rain falls. Is not it also
true that a telephone call may be enough to cheer you or to ruin your day? My
brothers and sisters, these are matters of emotion and nothing more. Here we
recall that we must always live in that place that is not a place, but is
beyond your emotional body, where we arrive by acknowledging and feeling the
emotions and never denying them.

Denial is unconsciousness. Therefore we do not want to deny anything. We accept
everything that arises. Everything. We do not judge anything, and we refrain
from analyzing what we experience. Now we travel a new path, the path of the
pure experiencing of being. We have fun experimenting, feeling the totality of
what we are. We enjoy the fullness of being that we are being now. We are no
longer interested in the being we once were, nor in being something different
in the future. Those beings are accepted and are worthy of our mercy. None of
them exist in our minds anymore, for we know the truth. We know for sure that
we are all that we are being, and that what we are is nothing other than the
living Christ. Thus we begin to enjoy the sanctity of our being. We give
ourselves the luxury and the freedom to feel and think whatever we feel or
think. We allow whatever comes; and release whatever goes. We recognize that we
are the consciousness that makes all that we are what it is and what it
experiences.

To be the being that experiences and to bring that experience to consciousness
without the slightest fear of anything that we may feel or think, is what will
allow us to go wherever we go and do whatever we do without fear. Sons and
daughters of the truth, you are never scared any more of anyone or anything.
You had been afraid of the feelings of your heart and the thoughts of your
mind. You did not know where they came from or where they were taking you. You
feared them because you thought that they capriciously imposed upon you, you
who lived at their mercy. Now you know that that is simply not true. Now you
accept what you feel and know that it is not necessary to evaluate where those
feelings come from, what they mean, or where they may be trying to take you.
They simply come to be felt—which is why they are called feelings.

The same goes for thoughts. We no longer get entangled in the endless thoughts
of the thinking mind which seeks to give meaning to everything, even to every
thought. We have passed that stage. Now we calmly accept that the mind thinks.
That is its nature. The mind was created to think and think. And we let it
think what it thinks, just as we allow the heart to express the feelings it
expresses. We take distance from these expressions. We observe them, feeling
and noticing, experimenting. But we are no longer confused about what we are.
We are not those emotions and feelings, nor the thoughts. We are the being that
God created in His likeness. We are the living Christ that lives in us. In this
way we live from the consciousness of Christ rather than from unconsciousness.

Rather than trying to eliminate fear, focus instead on not leaving anything out
of your consciousness. As you do this, fear will disappear without the
slightest effort, and love will be the only thing you experience. Let the
heralds of your being enter without restriction into the palace where the love
of God resides. When you have opened the floodgates of your consciousness,
allowing everything you experience, whatever it may be, to be embraced, then
you will live as what you are: the holy abode of Christ.

