---
title: "Final Words"
---

Beloved of all times and corners of the world!

These words are a song of love and truth. These words will continue to be given
because the world always needs the Word of God. This is also justice.

We bid you farewell for now but we will continue to extend love through this
particular manifestation.

This work is a work of wisdom because it is created by love and with love. It
is a work that comes from the Heaven of the one mind. We are one mind. We are
one holy heart. We are the same truth. The reality of union is what allows
these words to be said. As you know, there is no such thing as many minds or
many hearts. There is only the mind of Christ, in whose mind we all live.

These words are heard in all corners of the universe. Every moment you spend
united with these words you are bringing Heaven closer to Earth. You are
raising the dead and healing wounds. You are singing with us, the angels of
God, your friends and fellow saints, a hymn of praise and gratitude.

These words are not poetry, nor do they pretend to share hidden knowledge.
These words come from wisdom not of this world. They act mysteriously in
everything and everyone. The Word of God is always effective, without
exception.

We thank you with all our heart for spending time with us in this work. Please
know, beloved ones of Heaven, that when you unite in love with these words, you
are, literally, channels of light by which love flows from Heaven to all
creation. Your brothers and sisters, together with all creation, benefit.
Remember that we are a single being, so whatever you received through this
manifestation, through your open heart, has a holy impact on all.

Share with all what you have received. Be generous with this manifestation.
Remember that you are channels of light that can never be extinguished. Go into
the world announcing the good news. You have a means to do it. Enjoy the joy of
sharing. Be messengers of peace. Take love to the world.

In truth I tell you that in Heaven everything will be known. You will see souls
joyfully sing and dance through these words, for you have found the light of
Christ and returned to the path of love.

Children of God! Always remain united to the most Sacred Heart of Jesus and to
the Immaculate Heart of Mary, and you will be happy, for you will remain
eternally in the love that you truly are.

I bless you in Christâ€™s love, \
Archangel Raphael.

