---
ref: "Chapter Seven"
title: "The Time of Change"
---

Now is the time when changes can be made in your life and mind. Change occurs
first in the mind, as the mind is fundamental. If you would change your
behavior, your actions, you must first change the mind through which action
arises. Action expresses thought, thought is shaped by belief, beliefs arise as
response to values, values are determined by what you want and what you want to
be true. What you see, both within and without, is what you get. You cannot
receive as experience that which is excluded from your awareness.

The task then, is to open the mind to new possibilities. Change always involves
allowing something new, something not there before, to enter your mind. This
process of change has two requirements: You must make room, open the mind to
the new; and you must accept it when it comes, letting it become part of you.
Real change cannot occur in a mind wedded to the past, for such a mind is
concerned only with making the future a continuation of the past, and thus
assuring its safety, or so it thinks. What safety has the past ever given you?
The past is over and gone; it is not here to give you anything. 

The safety you seek through continuing the past into the future, and so
avoiding what the present has to offer, does not exist. Give up the past! Let
it go! By reliving the past in the present, you assure yourself of nothing but
suffering and death. Your safety lies in the present, in rediscovering the Self
and the Light of your Mind. There is no security to be found in a body,
destined to sicken and die. The Reality of what you are cannot be threatened by
anything, anywhere, at any time. The Self is beyond time and place, and
unaffected by them. This is your true security, where your safety lies forever.
Yet while you continue to identify with what you are not, it is unavailable to
you.

There are two possible identities, or so you think, and but one of these is
real. Yet while you prefer illusion to Truth, illusion will seem real to you
and have “real” effects. The dream seems very real to the dreamer until he
awakens, then it vanishes as the sun rises and shines away the darkness.

To awaken from the dream, you must begin to question its reality. Your
questioning must be guided from beyond the illusion, for within it, its effects
are very convincing. The thought system of the ego is consistent and makes
sense to you, within the parameters it has established. It must be questioned
from beyond those limits, and the premises on which it is based, carefully
examined. 

The ego teaches that you are a body, self-evidently separate from other bodies,
and living in a world of physicality. The world is external to you, surrounds
you, and exerts control over you, influencing you in many different ways. You
must, therefore, adapt yourself to it, and accept the limits it imposes. You
are fundamentally in a weak and vulnerable position, a fragile body that must
be protected from discomfort, threat, and uncertainty. Everything the ego
teaches is premised on you being a body; it is to the body’s senses that it
appeals to “prove” its picture of reality. The body and the world arise
together in your experience, for you cannot have one without the other.

Yet there is the experience of mind, of awareness, without which there would be
no experience at all. Awareness is clearly another order of reality, for it is
conscious of the external and the internal. In fact, awareness constitutes most
fundamentally what is internally experienced, mediating and processing all
perception and experience. This gives rise to the sense of personhood; without
awareness there is no sense of identity. 

You cannot make your fundamental sense of being aware an object of
consciousness. You can be aware of the content of your mind such as thoughts,
images, feelings, but you cannot be aware of awareness itself in the same way.
The Self Awareness is direct and simple, unmediated, and has nothing to do with
objects, images, or symbols. A moment’s reflection on this fact suggests, at
the very least, that you are perhaps more than just a body. In fact, you are
not a body at all, as the body, like all objects, is simply an image that
appears in your awareness. One or the other, the body or the mind, is your
reality, but not both. 


## Judgement
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

You need not worry about what you should do or what you should say. The Holy
Spirit will guide you in everything, in all situations, at all times. He alone
knows the response that is in your highest interest, and equally beneficial to
all who will be affected in any way by your decision. Referring decisions to
Him will always result in the best outcome for all concerned. It may not appear
so at times, but as you learn that you do not know enough to judge, and if you
will trust, the end result is certain. 

Judgement is not your function for the simple reason you do not have the
knowledge and understanding to judge truly. Judgement as the world sees it, is
based on opposites, on ideas of good or bad. As exercised by you, it reflects
your beliefs and biases, and is hardly open minded or fair. Your judgement is
an expression of your evaluation of a person, situation, or event; and this
evaluation is never based on complete knowledge. Judgement is used to defend
your belief system and justify your image of yourself. 

The Holy Spirit judges truly and He judges fairly. His judgement of God’s Holy
Son never changes, regardless of events or circumstances. God’s Son is
guiltless now and forever, and God’s Love for Him is unceasing. The Holy Spirit
knows you are not a body, or what the body says or does. He overlooks your
errors and dismisses your beliefs about yourself as untrue, for He knows you as
the Christ, the Self of All, Spirit Itself, God’s perfect and Holy Creation. He
shows you how to see your brother truly through the Vision of Christ He offers
you, and holds this vision of what you are for you, until you are ready to
receive it. 

The mind of forgiveness judges not, leaving all judgement to the Holy Spirit.
To judge is to condemn; you cannot condemn a brother and not share in that
condemnation. Forgiveness replaces all condemnation with a miracle of Love. To
forgive is to recognize the Truth in your brother, and overlook all
appearances. Through forgiveness you learn to look past the body, the external,
and see the Light within. Forgiveness offers you the Truth about yourself, for
what you see in your brother is also in you, or you would not be able to see
it. 

To see the Light in anyone, is to see It in all. Without this Vision of Truth,
are you blind, seeing through the ego’s eyes a world condemned. The ego cannot
see otherwise, for it sees you as guilty and deserving of punishment for your
sins. As it sees you, it sees the world, for what is seen within is always
projected without. To see a world condemned is to see a fearful world, waiting
to punish those whose condemnation it suffers. And so it continues, a vicious
circle of attack and counterattack, mercy nowhere to be found, only the pain of
attack and the suffering that follows. Is this what you want? To strike down
your brother and be struck down in turn? Or would you show mercy that mercy be
granted you also? 

The world is nothing in itself, being the projection of your thoughts. Yet are
there two ways to see it while it remains a part of your experience, each
vision arising from the thought system you have chosen. There are only two
worlds, just as there are only two guides who speak for them. Seen through the
ego’s eyes, is the world a dark and dreary place, sad and lonely, comfortless,
with every hand raised against you, and safety found only behind thick walls
and locked doors. 

The Holy Spirit shows you a very different world, shining in the Light of
kindness and mercy, where everyone is your brother and no enemy can be found.
Perfect safety is yours always, and the Unity of all is perfectly apparent.
Heaven is reflected here, for It is not resisted or denied. This is a forgiven
world where there is no guilt or condemnation, and the Light shines forth from
everyone and everything. 

When you see this Light in your brother, the world you experience will change.
To see It in another, is to recognize your brother as he truly is. This will
change the way you see yourself and the world, and nothing will be the same. 


## The Availability of Truth
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Whenever the Light is seen in anyone or anything, It will rush to join you, for
the Light, like Love, is One. To see the Light requires only the willingness to
do so, for the Light is in your Mind. The Holy Spirit holds this Light for you
until you are ready. While guilt rules your mind and your brother is seen as
enemy to you, the Light will not be seen. Guilt or innocence, darkness or
Light, the choice is always yours to make, and you will see what you have
chosen. 

It is impossible to see what you do not want to see. All perception reflects
what you want to be true, what you want to believe. It cannot be otherwise, for
this is perception’s purpose. Made as a substitute for knowledge, its purpose
was established by you. Unlike knowledge, perception is highly variable,
constantly changing, and always involves interpretation and judgement. Although
perception seems to be instantaneous, it is actually a repetition of, and
continuation of, the past. Through a mindset determined by the past, you
attempt to perceive the present. 

What you see is not out there to be seen, unless you put it there. The world
does not exist apart from your mind. Only your thoughts give the world its
seeming existence. The consequences of your thoughts, your ideas, are projected
outward and seen as if separate and self-existent. It is all a trick, a magic
show, where shadows appear as if solid, and what is One appears to be broken
into a multiplicity of unrelated parts. You see the world because you want to
see it; your investment in it is what makes it seem real to you, and gives it
apparent effects. Withdraw your investment completely and the world you see
will disappear, along with you and everything in it. 

Unless you support the world of separation with your wishes, it cannot be a
part of your experience, but will vanish into the nothingness from which it
arose. Your desire gives it existence, and attachment to the things of the
world maintains it in your mind. To desire and value even one thing here, will
keep you a prisoner, for one illusion contains all illusions. 

Truth, like illusion, is only available to you if you want It. Unlike illusion
however, Truth exists whether believed in or not. Truth is always there,
waiting for you to recognize It and invite It to return. You cannot serve two
masters; sooner or later you will tire of the ego and its shabby, unpredictable
gifts, and turn your attention back to Truth. 

The Holy Spirit waits for this opening, the birth of willingness, and joyfully
responds. He takes every little willingness on your part and adds His
Willingness, making it a mighty force for change. He stands always ready to
assist you in everything you do, and if you let Him, your life will transform.
Through the healing of your mind, through the return to Wholeness, your life
will change completely. And you will learn to give your brothers the blessings
you have received, for the Gifts of God are not for you alone, but are meant
for all. Only by sharing the Gifts God has given you, by giving Them away, can
you have Them for yourself. 

God gives no special favors, for everything He has, He gives to all. The nature
of his Gifts is all inclusiveness, and through this recognition you are made
ready to receive Them. To receive God’s Gifts, <span class="under">is</span> to
be willing to give Them away, and by so doing are you blessed. Your Father
knows only giving and He gives unceasingly. If you would know Him again, you
must give everything to everyone, without exception. Only thus do you meet the
condition of the Kingdom. 

To return to the Kingdom is the eventual goal of everyone in this world. You
may live many lifetimes and not be conscious of this fact. Yet there will come
a time when each and every one will become aware of this goal. Dimly at first,
then slowly, the awareness will grow until the desire for peace and clarity
becomes increasingly urgent. This is not always recognized for what it is, yet
somewhere in your mind you sense the terrible incompleteness of this world, and
you begin to recognize that you will never find happiness and fulfillment here.
You see that everything you value and love will change, will pass away; that
you will lose everything until you too pass away, leaving nothing behind. The
meaninglessness of life as a body in separation will become painfully apparent,
undeniably so. The world you see will be as ashes in your mouth, tasteless and
bitter. Now is the time for you to leave this world, a decision that was made
long ago. You need not stay a moment longer, yet you do not know what to do. 

Deep in your mind lies buried a memory of before time began. It is a joyful
memory, shining with the Light of Heaven Itself. There was a time when you knew
nothing of separation, a world of form ruled by fear, suffering, and loss. You
lived in Light; you <span class="under">were</span> Light, continually
extending Itself in Love, eternally joyful, eternally creating. This has never
changed. Even now you are Light, Mind, and Spirit, God’s Creation, at One with
Him and All that is real. 

That memory, that knowledge, is lost to you, gone from your awareness, buried
too deep for you to reach it unaided. The purpose of the mind training, the
constant application of spiritual discipline and right understanding to your
thoughts, emotions, and actions, is to heal and prepare your mind so this
ancient memory can return. 

You are Spiritual Being. You are Truth Itself, Reality Itself. You have
forgotten for a moment, a tiny tick of time, what you are; and all that seemed
to happen is but a dream with no effect on you at all. You will not know this
however, until you awaken from the dream; and awaken you will, for it has
already happened. You have not yet reached the place in your dream where you
leave the world forever, yet can you hasten the coming of that day by your
dedication and focus now. 

Whenever you choose Truth over illusion, Love over fear, forgiveness in place
of grievance, you take a big step closer to that day. By learning the lessons
of Truth, the lessons of forgiveness the Holy Spirit teaches, you lessen the
need for time. This is time’s purpose: To be used for learning that will bring
you to the completion of learning, making time itself no longer necessary. As
you learn your lessons, the Holy Spirit will collapse time for you, bringing
you ever closer to the end of time. 

When you decide that leaving this world is all you want, time is shortened
considerably. To use time well is to abide in the present, to be very aware in
the present moment. This must be a consistent practice, a consistent focusing,
arising from a constant remembering of your life’s purpose, your single
purpose. This remembering, this focusing in the present moment, will grow, will
strengthen as you practice it over time. It must develop until it becomes
continuous, or nearly so. 

Why? Your mind is continuously active. There is a constant movement of thought
and feeling, a stream of activity that runs through your awareness unceasingly.
You are constantly responding by giving it your attention, thus enabling it to
continue unabated. The constant projection of thought arises from the ego and
serves its interests. You are constantly choosing to identify with your thought
process, giving rise to a sense of personhood, a personal identity. This
“person” is the ego in expression. This identification is so ingrained, so well
established, that it is automatic and constant. Nowhere in this activity is
there room for you to experience what you are as simple awareness, empty of
egoic identity.

The only way to experience what you are beyond the egoic limitation, is to
quiet the mind, to make space for something else to reveal itself. This
requires you, as awareness, to become conscious of what is passing through your
mind, and consciously refuse the habitual movement of egoic identification,
choosing instead to merely observe. This is the basis of what is commonly
referred to as meditation. The fact that you can do this, observe rather than
be absorbed in the constant activity of thought, is proof that you are not
simply the egoic activity in mind, but rather are the mind itself. This is
often first experienced through meditation practices such as are found in the
Workbook of *A Course in Miracles*, as well as in the spiritual disciplines of
other spiritual teachings. 

The willingness to be present in your mind, moment to moment, rather than lost
in the constant chatter of the ego, must be developed. It is an active
willingness, constantly exercised, constantly remembered. Strength of mind, of
focused awareness, is also required. Given the requisite willingness and single
purpose, this strength will grow over time, giving you the ability to choose,
to consciously decide each moment for Truth, for Love, for freedom. 

The thoughts that arise in your awareness come from one of two sources: the
Holy Spirit or the ego. There are no sources but these two for everything that
appears in your mind. Which you choose to follow is up to you, but you must
develop the presence of mind and the understanding necessary to make conscious
choices consistently. Until then, you will vacillate between the two, as
unconscious, habitual tendencies will assert themselves, again and again.

## Unconditional Love
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

While unconscious tendencies dominate your mind, you cannot freely choose. The
choices you make in your life will follow a repeating pattern, even though
situations and circumstances may change. Yet the outcome will be the same. To
bring about meaningful change, you must learn to know your own mind, not
superficially but deeply. You must become aware of your mind in action, for it
is always active. Its activity either multiplies and strengthens illusion, or
moves you in the direction of Truth.

To reinforce Truth in your mind, you must follow the guidance you receive from
the Holy Spirit, for He alone knows Truth. You have lost the awareness of It,
and banished It even from your memory. He is the link between you and your
Creator, between you and your Self. As long as you are lost in the play of
illusion, He will never leave you. The Holy Spirit is always available and will
give you all the help you need, and can accept, at any time. You need only
develop the habit of asking, and be receptive and open, to receive answers.

This requires the development of trust on your part, which is usually a long
process that unfolds over time, although it need not be. Long accustomed to
making decisions yourself with the help of the ego, to ask for guidance from
the unseen goes against everything the world believes. Yet this is precisely
what you must do if you are to return to Truth. Truth is also unseen through
the body’s eyes, although the mind easily sees Its reflection.

Whatever you do, do with Love, from Love, as Love. Love is what you are, and
you cannot, in truth, be anything else. Yet in dreams can you imagine yourself
as something else, an identity in opposition to Love, with Love’s Presence
obscured by fear. Love is not found in a world ruled by fear and loss, for It
is not welcome but in distorted form, reduced to “specialness,” reserved for
“special” relationships in which all others are excluded.

Love enters not where exclusion denies Its Wholeness, for Its Wholeness is Its
nature and meaning. Think not you will find Love in special arrangements that
deny and separate. It is not Love you will find but guilt, not safety but
uncertainty. To exclude anyone or anything from your Love is to exclude
yourself, for Love is One as you are One, and to deny your Wholeness in any way
is to place yourself outside of It. Nothing is gained by refusing to love but
misery and loneliness.

You have the responsibility, if you choose to accept it, of bringing Love to
this world, to this loveless place. Love returns to this world one mind at a
time, yet every mind aflame with Love, will pass this flame to everyone they
meet. Such is Love’s return, a contagion that will spread until Love covers the
whole world and everyone in it.

But first must the flame be lit in <span class="under">your</span> mind. The
mind must be made ready, purified, to receive and hold Love. The fear of Love
that dominates the mind in separation must be healed, and right understanding
established. The many forms in which fear appears must be recognized and
released. Belief in the necessity of attack and defense, all attempts to harm
another in any way, must be renounced entirely. The condition of Love is
harmlessness, and this must become the state of your mind that Love be made
welcome. The mind made ready for Love’s return is quiet, at peace within
itself, and filled with goodwill towards all. To such a mind does Love gladly
return.

You have tried in many different ways to meet the challenges of life. You have
employed many different strategies, but there is one thing you have never done:
You have never tried to love unconditionally. To lay down all your defenses,
and come out from behind the thick walls you have erected in your mind, is
considered madness by all who inhabit this world. And yet, not to do so is
where madness really lies. Your defenses have not made you safe, but have
rather increased your sense of weakness and insecurity. They have reinforced
and strengthened your belief in separation, which is the real source of your
fear and anxiety.

If you are a body, there is no defense however strong, no strategy however
“brilliant,” that will keep you safe forever. Death waits for all, and there is
no defense that will defeat it. You but postpone the day of reckoning when all
your hopes, wishes, and dreams lay trampled in the dust, as death celebrates
its triumph and your little life is snatched away.

You are not a body, you are Spirit, and nothing in this world can affect your
changeless state in any way. You need no sophisticated defenses or clever
strategies to keep you safe. God Himself keeps you safe, forever abiding in
peace and joy. Even in this world you are not in any danger, but to know this,
you must lay down your defenses and give up your need to attack. Only through
defenselessness can you find safety, for it is the defenseless in whom Love
finds a home. Love’s perfect vulnerability keeps It safe from all harm, and
only those who know Love can live fearlessly.


## Two Worlds
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Whenever you are tempted to attack, remember that you always attack yourself
first. Surely to attack yourself is not the way to guarantee safety. Although
the ego teaches that you can attack your brother without suffering its effects
yourself, do not believe this. Whatever you do to anyone, you do also to
yourself, for mind is One, even when asleep. Whatever you give, you give
yourself, for you are always and only giving to yourself. This is the
inescapable law established by God in your Creation, and cannot be
circumvented. In this is your salvation made sure, for it established your
Oneness with your brother, thus proving separation impossible.

It is always in your interest, and only in your interest, to forgive. You are
always and only forgiving yourself. To forgive yourself, you must forgive all
your brothers, for it is your “sins,” or guilt, that you see in them. Your
brothers are a part of you as you are a part of them, and to truly forgive is
to recognize what is true of one, is true of all. Either all of you are
innocent, sinless, guiltless, or all are guilty. There is nothing in between
these two choices; this is a choice that everyone in this world must make.

If you choose guilt, you make the world real in your mind and sin inescapable.
Is this what you want? You made that choice once, and it remains in effect
until you choose again. Its effects appear in the world you see, for perception
but reflects what you believe, what you want to be true. You choose what you
want to see, what you desire to be true, and perception reflects that choice
and thus “proves” its reality. You see what you want to see. 

To choose guiltlessness instead will change the world you see. Without the
condemnation you laid upon it, is the world free to reflect Heaven, to mirror
Truth. The world then becomes a happy place where real learning takes place,
illusion is undone, and freedom from fear, suffering, and death, becomes
possible. A forgiven world becomes the temporary home of God’s Son, where He
rests a little while before returning to the Kingdom. It smiles upon Him and
supports Him in every way. 

These are the only two worlds you can see, the world of guilt or the world
forgiveness rules, and each but reflects your choice of what you want to see.
There is no world separate from your mind, waiting for you to inhabit it. The
world is your projection, and your choice. There is one important difference
between the two worlds. The world forgiveness shows you, reflects the Truth
that lies beyond all dreaming. It is a borderland from which Truth can be
reached, and all dreams left behind forever.

The world of guilt and sin, of fear and hatred, is but nothingness, illusion
through and through, whose only purpose is to keep you prisoner, subject to
pain, sickness, suffering, and death. This world was made to be a place where
Truth is excluded, and terrible illusions enshrined in Its place. This world
was and is nothing more than a mistake, an impossible thought, and it has
seeming existence only through your choice. Your thought gave this world
existence, and you maintain it in thought until you want it no more. However,
you must truly want it no more to be free of it and the limited vision that
witnesses to its reality. To want Truth and yet maintain illusion in your mind,
is to guarantee that you will not attain It. The choice of which world you
would see and inhabit and experience, is a complete one, and to choose one is
to deny the other. And what you deny, you will not see.

The world of separation and death or the world in which Truth is reflected,
Love or fear, the Self or the self, joy or pain, the Holy Spirit or the ego;
this the choice you are called upon to make, not just once but every day, every
hour, every minute, even every moment. There is no other choice you can ever
make. Every choice you have made in the past, every choice you make now, and
every one you will make in the future, as long as choice seems possible to you,
is a choice between Truth and illusion.

You who have wandered so long in an alien land far from your Home, listen, and
listen well. The world of illusion, the world you see with the body’s eyes,
will never fulfill you, no matter what you do. It will never give you peace or
joy. Never will you find a lasting and unchanging Love that will not desert
you, or a happiness that is unshakeable. Nothing of value, nothing real or
lasting or wholly satisfying, can be found in this world of dreams.

Dreams will never satisfy God’s Son. Only Reality Itself, the Truth of what you
are, your eternal Oneness with God and your function in Him, will bring you the
completion you seek. Do not waste time looking for completion where it cannot
be found, for it is not here. Do not delay the inevitable. To do so is to
prolong the suffering this world offers you. Everyone will return to God, to
the Kingdom, to the Self, the Christ they share with God. It is God’s Will and
your will also, though you have forgotten.

