---
ref: "Chapter Four"
title: "Beginning Again"
---

If you were to ask yourself, *How do I go about contacting God?*, no answer would
likely be forthcoming. In the separation from your Creator, you have lost all
memory of Him. Nevertheless, deep in your unconscious mind, His memory remains,
but you cannot reach that depth unaided.  Help must be given and received, and
your mind purified of all that prevents reunion with God. 

The function of the Holy Spirit is to guide you through the process of
purifying your mind. To purify the mind is to release it from all that is
unworthy of the Son of God. Your mind is held a willing prisoner behind thick
walls it has built. Behind these walls you feel safe, for Truth cannot go where
It is unwanted. You think your defenses were made to protect you from the
threats you perceive, and that is true. Yet is it also true that what your
defenses are <span class="under">really</span> meant to protect you from, is
the Truth. If you were not actively defending against the Self you have left
behind and thrust out of your mind, you could not resist Its call to return and
be your Self again in your entirety. 

When you finally hear the call of your Soul, you must answer it. Its call
cannot be ignored, for it is the call of your Heart to your heart. When the
Heart calls to you, you will recognize it as the call of Love to love. Love can
be ignored; It can be denied; you can dissociate yourself from It; but It will
never cease to call out to you, for It knows you as Itself. 

Love is not simply a human emotion; Love is the Creative Power of the Universe.
Through Love is everything created, for God is Love, and He is the Source of
all that is. In Love were you created, and through Love do you create. Even in
this world are all acts of Love truly creative, though not regarded as such.
Only the truly creative is real, for the nature of Reality is to create, and It
creates like Itself. Thus is Unity eternally extending Itself, and thereby are
Love and joy eternally increasing. 

Where Love is absent, there can be no true creation. The world, where Love is
feared and fear enshrined, was made through the uncreative use of energy or
mind. Made as a response to fear, yet based on it, the world could not but
exclude Love. The world is not a real creation but a projection of mind gone
mad. The result was a dream state in which everything is as it is not. Here is
Love confined to “special relationships,” be they with people or with things,
not freely given to all. Such is not Love, for Love is all and cannot, in
truth, be withheld anywhere, for any reason. Love is not “special” in any way.
It belongs to all and gives to all. 

The return of Love to your mind will heal all fear and conflict over time.
Where Love holds sway, is fear banished. It cannot live in the Presence of Love
for fear is darkness, and Love shines away all darkness. Love cannot return
unless It is welcomed. To welcome Love is to accept It totally. Such acceptance
requires the renunciation of all attack, in the recognition that attack brings
you nothing, and that your dedication to it has cost you everything. Such is
the choice: Love or fear, to join with or to attack, to include or exclude.
There are never more than these two from which to choose. And which you choose
will determine the direction of your life’s journey. 

## The End of Doubt
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

The end of time is Eternity. When time is transcended, only Eternity remains.
Time seems to be sequential, yet is that an artificial order imposed upon it.
Time actually runs backwards as well as forwards. And all time is, in fact,
over. By keeping it alive in your mind, it continues to serve as the background
or context of your experience, helping you maintain separation. Wherever you
look, you see the evidence of change, and time is the measure of change. Time
can be transcended in any moment by remembering Truth. 

Whenever you are in doubt, call on the Holy Spirit to dispel all doubt. He
knows who you are, and what your function is. There is no doubt of any kind in
His Mind, for He is not an ego, and all doubt is of the ego. The ego knows
nothing, understands nothing. When you listen to the ego, you are listening to
the voice of ignorance. To listen to the Holy Spirit is to listen to the Voice
for God. He speaks for God, knowing God’s Will for you, and He perceives
through your mind. He is aware of what you see and experience, and knows it is
not true. He translates what is true into a form you can recognize in this
world, leading you away from illusions, back to what is true. 

Trust is essential if you are to find your way back to God. You must learn to
trust the Guide given you by your Father, for He alone knows the way. You
cannot find what was lost to you so long ago that even its memory has been
erased from your awareness. God has given you the help you need, but you must
avail yourself of it. You must ask for help in all sincerity, be willing to
hear the answer, and be willing to follow the directions given. Above all, you
must learn to trust the Voice for God, and be willing to learn what He will
teach you. 

All that you have taught yourself must be discarded, for everything you have
learned is not true. You learned it from a guide who knows nothing but falsity,
and has as its goal your death, and yet you have trusted this guide and seldom
doubted what was shown to you. Now you must withdraw your faith in illusion and
the voice that speaks for it, and give your faith instead to the One Who knows
Truth, holds Its memory for you in your mind, and will guide you back to your
One Self, if you let Him. The way back is neither difficult nor complicated.
Yet you will not find this journey easy, for to heal the false mind and to face
and heal all fear, is for most an ordeal. It need not be, yet the  mind that
believes in sacrifice and attack, is dominated by fear; and to a fearful mind,
the release and healing of all fear is usually experienced as painful. 

The ego itself is a contraction of fear; its core is fear. Although this fear
is usually not experienced consciously, nonetheless it casts its dark shadow
across your life, making joy and peace impossible. When joy, peace, and Love
are all you want, that is all you will have. Until that day comes, you will
vacillate back and forth between Love and fear. It is this vacillation that
causes the pain and suffering experienced in the process of spiritual
awakening. 

## The Meaning of Love
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

The Holy Spirit teaches Love, and reinforces this learning in your mind, while
helping you recognize everything in your mind that is not Love. Whatever is not
Love is fear. He helps you face fear and heal it by choosing to let it go,
withdrawing your belief and investment in it, and inviting Love to take its
place. Salvation can be described simply as the healing of fear and the return
of Love, the replacement of guilt with innocence. 

In order for Love’s meaning to be restored to your awareness, investment in
attack must be completely withdrawn, without exception. Attack is never
justified, although the ego expends considerable time and energy doing so. When
you realize to attack your brother is to attack yourself, for your brother is a
part of you, the insanity of attack will be self-evident. The ego teaches you
can attack and not be affected by the consequences of your action. The Holy
Spirit teaches whatever you do, you do to yourself. This is an inescapable
spiritual law. Your intent to harm another will always result in harming
yourself. There is nothing whatsoever to be gained by attack in any form.
Sanity tells you to lay it down, to give it up entirely, to cease all actions,
words, and thoughts whose purpose is to attack an apparent other or yourself. 

The real purpose of all attack is to keep Love away. Love you fear more than
anything, for to allow Love’s return is to give up the tight control fear has
imposed on your life; you believe this attempt to control circumstances and
conditions keeps you safe. Whose safety is seemingly assured by such action?
Only a body, frail and surrounded by uncertainties, could possibly need such
protection. 

You are not a body, you are Spirit. Your safety is guaranteed by your Creator.
No elaborate plans of defense and attack, no ironclad control of apparent
circumstances, are needed by God’s Holy Son. Such plans simply reinforce in
your mind the false identification with the body. This error endangers your
peace of mind and safety, for by thinking you are what you are not, you turn
your back on what you are in Truth. 

Only the laying down of all defenses assures your safety. Defenses but confirm
the sense of threat and danger that you believe confronts you. Whenever you
respond to anything with less than Love, you are throwing away what keeps you
safe. Love guarantees your safety, not fear. Love’s defenselessness protects
you from all harm. Love knows neither defense nor attack, for It sees only
Itself in everyone and everything. That which contains all and lives in all,
cannot be threatened, for what could attack innocence itself? In the discovery
of your innocence you begin to realize you are the Holy Son of God, held safe
forever in His Mind. You always have been, are now, and will forever be. 

Spirit is not of this world nor is It affected by it in any way. Those who
dream they are bodies, populate their world with images of separation. A world
of separation is a world where conflict rules. Bodily identities, each complete
in itself and separated from other bodies by space and personal history, have
different perceived needs and desires. They believe in a world of scarcity
where, for one to gain, another must lose. This cannot but lead to competition
and conflict, as each pursues his own interest at the expense of others. Where
perceived reality is based on, and is an expression of, the belief in
separation, chaos and conflict are the inevitable result. Separate bodies with
separate interests cannot join; only minds can join. In order to truly join
with your brother, you must look beyond the body and see him as he truly is. He
is Mind as you are Mind, and minds can join and are joined beyond the bodily
form. 

## One Light
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Through the Light of your Mind, you see the Light in your brother, and in that
Light is your Oneness made manifest. The One Light is the radiance in which all
appear; in the return to this Light, are you restored to Wholeness, and
separation is healed. You are Light, just as you are Mind, and Being or Spirit.
Nothing can ever lessen this Light or dim Its radiance, for It is the Light of
God shining eternally in His Mind, unchanged, even as It continues to extend
Itself forever. 

Whether you are aware of It or not, your Self abides in shining silence, at One
with Its Creator, fulfilling the function of creating given in Its Creation by
God.  Your Self is unaffected by your ignorance amid the world of dreams, yet
It longs for the return of that part of Itself that has chosen separation.
Separation is not simply an error that occurred in a distant past; that error
is being maintained and held in your mind through active memory, through every
thought, feeling, word, and action. It is what you are doing every moment of
every day with the choices you are making. If you were to stop, even for a
moment, Truth would rush in, returning you to the awareness of what you have
always been. Salvation’s goal is just this return of Truth to your mind, and
reunion with the Self. 

The process of this return to the Self, unfolding in time, is the Atonement:
the correction of perception and thought. Although the curriculum, what must be
learned, does not vary, the process of learning itself is very individualized.
What you learn, when you learn it, in what order, is the result of your
individual characteristics, the circumstances of your life, and the speed at
which willingness develops. The awakening takes place for each in a unique
manner, yet the experience is universal. All reach the same territory and leave
the ego at the gate. 

Each has a unique part to play in God’s Plan of Salvation. No one but you can
fulfill your part. The Holy Spirit assigns your part, and holds it for you
until you are ready to accept it. True happiness can only be found by accepting
your part, and completing it. To refuse to do so is to reject salvation and
continue a life of separation. You will never be happy while you live apart
from your Self and your Creator. The nature of the Self is joy and happiness,
and to reject your true Identity is to deprive yourself of happiness. 

Whenever the choice is made for God, the entire Universe rejoices. This choice
cannot be made for you alone. All your brothers, every living thing, share in
the joy and freedom of that decision, and all are blessed along with you. Your
Father has been waiting for your return since time began. Heaven is incomplete
without you. You will sing again the hymn of praise to your Creator and all
Creation, for the song lives still in your memory. 

The Holy Spirit guides you gently back to the Home you left but in dreams. His
gentle Voice calls you to awaken, to open your eyes and recognize your Self, to
leave behind the world of dreams, and disappear into the Heart of God. 

If you were to try to find God on your own, you would not succeed. The identity
seeking God is, by its very nature and existence, the denial of and the defense
against what it seeks. The ego was made as a substitute for your real Identity,
as a way to maintain the illusion and exclude Truth from awareness. How can you
find what you seek by exercising the denial of it? 

## The Holy Spirit
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

The Holy Spirit, God’s Answer to the separation, shows you the way, makes it
clear to you, and guides your every step. Without Him, you would be lost
indeed. The way out of a self-imposed prison cannot be found by following the
directions of the one who guards the walls. The ego will never lead you back to
freedom, for to do so would be its end. It knows nothing of freedom or where to
find it, and regards the idea of liberation as a dangerous threat. It will
never do anything other than act to maintain separation and the belief in guilt
and sin that is its foundation stone. It is not to the ego you must turn to
begin the journey back to God. 

You must, in fact, turn away from the egoic identification, its beliefs, its
values, and all it represents, if you would be free of fear, pain, and
suffering, and recover your lost Identity as the Christ, God’s Holy Creation.
You are either the ego or the Christ, you cannot be both. God’s Holy Son is not
a body, a separate identity lost in a world of form. He is Spirit, Light, and
Mind, and in the true state of Union with God, is Co-creator with God. The
choice is yours as to which identity becomes your experience. Only one is real.
The other is but folly, a dream indulged in since time began, a journey that
goes nowhere over and over again. 

The Holy Spirit knows what you need. He knows your strengths and weaknesses. He
uses your strengths and helps you to heal, to free yourself from your
weaknesses. There is nothing He does not know, and He will not hesitate to
inform you of everything you need to know in any given situation, if you ask
Him and are willing to receive the answer. He will give you as much help as you
are willing to accept. Your willingness is all He asks of you, not more, but
also not less. Even then He gives you His willingness to supplement yours, and
His strength to carry you through. 

When the commitment is made to follow the Holy Spirit, to turn over decision
making to Him where possible, progress will be rapid. As you do this more and
more consistently, your trust will grow, for you will recognize the rightness
of all His decisions. You may not always understand His answers, but if you
will trust and persist, their correctness will be apparent in time. He cannot
steer you wrong for He leads you only in one direction, the only direction
there is in truth, towards God. He has one purpose, one goal, and a unified or
whole perception. This unified perception, the Vision of Christ, He gives to
you that you may see truly, and so come to recognize your brother as he is. 

Your brother is not his body or what his body does or says. He is the Christ,
as you are, and to see him as he is will restore to you the awareness of what
you are together. Alone and separate is neither the Self, for Truth is One and
encompasses all. To see the Christ in any one is to confirm It as your Self.
What you see in One, you will see in all. The Light shines undimmed in every
Mind, just beyond the form. The Light is not of this world, yet spiritual
Vision sees Its reflection everywhere, in everything. 

There is nothing you need do, for what is needed is not doing but undoing. The
Atonement, the Plan of Salvation, is an undoing of your mind, of your thought
system, that forgiveness may come to free your mind of guilt and make room for
Truth’s return. If what you are is not of this world, and I assure you this is
true, the simplest and most natural thing you could do would be to leave the
world forever. Only your wish to be a part of this world keeps it real in your
mind. If you truly want to return to your real Home in God, and relinquish your
fear of Love, you will be gone from here.  

The task of the Holy Spirit is to guide your learning so as to bring the
recognition this world is not your home. Once that is truly realized, the
longing to return to Heaven will arise, and this longing will take you Home.
Happiness will never be found in this world, for it is not here. Only by being
what you are in Truth, will you be happy and at peace. 

## The End of Illusion
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

The beginning of the end of illusion starts when the desire arises within you
to find another way to live. Somewhere in your mind, the recognition has arisen
that life as you have lived it, is without meaning or purpose. The idea of
carrying on as you have been doing, fills you with despair. And so you begin to
question, slowly at first and then with increasing dedication. The call of the
Self, unceasing since time began, is being heard again somewhere in your mind.
The spell has been broken, not completely yet, but cracks are beginning to
appear in the edifice of the ego’s thought system. Little by little, the Light
begins to shine through the cracks and illuminate the darkness. Now there is
hope, for you are beginning to see, to sense perhaps, there is another way to
think and understand and live. 

At this time, it is very important, extremely important, to respond to this
opening in your mind, and begin taking the first steps of the journey homeward.
Do not let this insight, this feeling, this recognition, still dim perhaps but
real nevertheless, slip away. Do not let it simply drop from your mind, and
fall back into despair and hopelessness. This is the time to ask for help, to
begin a commitment to a spiritual teaching and discipline. An undisciplined
mind is at the mercy of all its past associations, judgements, likes, dislikes,
habits, and impulses. A mind controlled by its past is not free. The journey of
spiritual awakening, of return to Wholeness and Oneness, is also the journey to
freedom. Only a mind that knows itself as it is, as Wholeness, can be free. 

When once the journey back begins, the end is certain. You may take your time,
stretch it out as long as you wish, even wander off a little while, yet the
Voice for God will always call you back, and It will be heard. The purpose of
this teaching is to save you time. Once the goal is recognized and the course
is set, there is no reason to dally here, to waste time. All those in time are
subject to suffering and death. To free yourself from the bonds of space and
time, you must realize your true nature as the Self, the Christ. As Truth
Itself, you are beyond time, yet the process of awakening takes place in time.
Time must be used, and used well, to bring you to its ending. 

The Holy Spirit will guide you through the maze of time. He will use everything
that happens to point you beyond it. There is nothing in your life or mind He
cannot use by reinterpreting what you have made. All things are lessons He can
help you learn, and you can become a consistent learner under His guidance. To
learn consistently, you must let Him show you the common elements in all
situations and circumstances, that you may recognize and see truly. Do not let
yourself be fooled by appearances, by form. What is important is what the form
conceals: the content. To this you must respond, and respond rightly. The Holy
Spirit teaches you the right response in every circumstance, and this will set
you free in time. 

## Love and Fear
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Under the ego’s guidance, all things are used to keep you in bondage to fear.
Separation is perpetuated and no escape is possible. Whenever you react to
anyone or anything as an ego, you have introduced fear. It cannot be otherwise
for the ego represents fear. Its entire thought system is constructed of fear
and guilt, and maintained by them. No peace of mind is possible when fear is
your constant companion. 

The choice given you, no matter how it may look, is always between fear and
Love. Choice is easy once you recognize the only two alternatives, and are able
to see clearly the difference between them. Who would choose fear over Love?
Yet this is what you do over and over because of the confusion in your mind.
The ego has taught you that fear is Love, and Love is fear, for this is what it
believes. You need not believe such insanity unless you choose to do so. The
power to choose is the way out of prison, if you learn to exercise it
consciously and understand truly just what it is you are choosing each time and
what the consequences are. 

What is the Self? It is Spirit, the Essence, the Truth of all that is; It is
pure Being, pure Awareness or Mind, Bliss, joy, peace, Love, happiness. The
Self is the Reality, of Which and as Which, you exist. It is God’s One
Creation, the Christ, with Which He is forever One; The Self is His Extension,
His Joy and Completion. The Self is what you are, in every true sense of the
word. It is what you lost when you separated yourself from God, for the Self
cannot be separate from God. 

In separation was your Self lost to you, not in fact, but It was banished from
your awareness, replaced by a dream of separation, of form and difference, in
which you live in isolation as a body, destined to suffer and die. God’s Holy
Son became a frail creature, beset by limitation, at the mercy of a world he
could not control. Such is the reality you have chosen for yourself, not in
truth but in dreams. Yet dreams can end when the dreamer so decides, for he can
withdraw his belief in them at any time. Until he does so, they will continue,
and his little life will be marked by pain, suffering, and death. 

This is not your Father’s Will for you, and there is no Will but God’s. Your
Will is God’s Will when you are being what you are in Truth. In dreams you can
seem to have a will apart, a will that opposes the Will of God; through that
belief comes the world you see, and all the misery in it. If you but knew that
your Father wills only perfect happiness, peace, and joy for you forever, you
would rush back into His welcoming Arms, and never again would you feel pain or
sorrow. And all of this world you thought you made would disappear from your
Holy Mind. 

If you would have the Truth return and set you free, you must face the fear of
Truth, of God, that lies buried deep in your unconscious mind. All fear in your
mind, whether conscious or unconscious, distorts your thinking, feeling, and
perceiving, and casts its dark shadow across your entire life. The lifting of
this dark shadow permits happiness to return and take its place. 

Fear is something you have made, and by so doing you have cast out Love.
Without Love, is life dull and joyless, and its meaning will elude you. Only
Love gives life meaning, for Love is life. A life without Love is no life at
all, although you have tried very hard to make a life in which Love has been
replaced with a pale and meaningless substitute. In the human mind, love is
reserved for “special” relationships. These relationships are esteemed and
protected above all else. Yet, if the object of this “special love” does not
meet expectations, love is withdrawn and another is found to take its place.

Love does not come and go; It is not arbitrarily given and then withdrawn. Such
is not Love, but exchange, a bargain made between separate bodies in which each
tries to get much and give little. “Special” relationships are not based on
Love but on fear; they keep guilt and fear alive in your experience and
guarantee Love’s absence. Do not make of Love a bargain based on maintaining
belief in separation. For if you do, you will not understand Love’s meaning,
and you will not know Love. 

Love’s purpose is to create like Itself. Its nature is to extend forever and
thus continually increase. Love cannot be limited or bound in any way. To do so
is to drive It from your mind, leaving your mind empty and lifeless. This world
is the consequence of replacing Love with fear. Happiness and joy disappeared
also, for they are part of Love. If you were to let go your resistance to Love,
and allow Its Presence in your mind once again, you would be freed at once of
the bondage to fear and guilt, for they cannot go where Love is. 

There is no way to love partially. Love is all encompassing, all inclusive,
without exceptions. If you would know Love again, and in this knowing be set
free, you must be willing to give to all without exception. Love gives, and
freely, to all without holding back. To hold back is to deny Love’s nature and
so to lose It. If you would have Love, you must give It, for by giving you will
receive. To give and to receive are One; this the law that governs all giving.
To refuse to give is to make receiving impossible. 

Whenever you give Love to anyone or anything, you are giving It to all. The
nature of Love, when readmitted to this world, is to give Itself to all. Love
will radiate from you if you let It, and everywhere you go Its blessings go
with you. You need only accept Love as It is. To do that is to renounce
everything in your  mind that would deny or attack Love’s Presence. All attack
thoughts, all defenses, all belief in sin and guilt, must be given up and
allowed to leave your Holy Mind forever, if you would know Love again. God is
Love, and in your Creation, He gave you everything that He is. You are Love
Itself; in the acceptance of this fact are you healed and your mind set free to
return to God. 

To receive the Truth, you must be willing to give what you have been given, to
see It everywhere. In the willingness to share, to give, you are made ready for
Truth’s return. Only a mind purified of falsity can recognize Truth and welcome
It. In this recognition, are you ready to return to the Kingdom. The Kingdom is
the state of Truth in which you abide in God, at One with all his Creation. 

## Truth and the Present
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Now is the only time there is. The present is independent of the sequencing
which you impose on time; it is not limited by time unless you impose limits
upon it. Now is where you meet God, for He is always present. In the present,
the Truth reveals Itself as your Mind, and only then can your mind live again
as Truth. Whatever you may do, whatever you may believe, has no meaning unless
it arises from the Truth of your Mind. All else, whatever it may be, is the
continuation of the meaningless patterning of the ego. 

As long as the past continues to dominate your mind, the present cannot be
revealed to you. In the present you live, breathe,  and have your Being. You
learn and transform only in the present. To fully enter and abide in the
present, the past must be released, forgotten, even for a little while. The
present blossoms in a mind that is empty, receptive, and quiet. Like Truth, it
cannot come until the mind makes room for it and meets its conditions. 

When you are constantly busy in your mind, reliving the past or projecting a
future, the present is covered up by the constant flow of thoughts and images,
none of which have their origin in the now. Truth enters a quiet mind in which
the meaningless activity of constant thought has ceased, and stillness
prevails. Truth will never force Its entry but can only respond to sincere
invitation. When the continuous busyness of mind and body characterizes your
life, Truth is not welcome and will be missing from your experience. 

The only thing you need do for Truth to return to your awareness, is be willing
to receive It. This is not as simple as it sounds for your mind is split into
many parts, and contains conflicting wishes, desires, and even goals. Your mind
must be integrated in its entirety, inner conflict resolved, and a condition
of, at least, relative peace restored. To attain this integration and stability
in which willingness can meaningfully develop, is the goal of spiritual
practice. 

If your mind were simple and direct, like the Truth, time would not be needed.
In how many is this the case? For most, the healing of the mind, the return to
Wholeness and Unity, is a process that unfolds in time, as the false thought
system of the ego is gradually undone. Dedication, commitment, perseverance,
and the constant exercise of willingness are needed to undo all that is false,
and let it be replaced by Truth only. Only what is true, what was given in your
Creation, is worthy to occupy the Mind that God created One. 

Separation is an attempt to leave behind what is true, to drive it from the
mind, and replace it with what is unstable and unworthy of you as God’s
Creation. You will never be satisfied with what is false and untrustworthy.
Only in dreams can illusion seem to take the place of Truth; yet all it has
ever brought you was conflict, fear, loss, pain, suffering, and death. When you
truly begin to realize this fact, to face it squarely without denial, the
buried fear and pain in your mind begin to rise to awareness, and you are, with
the help of the Holy Spirit, able to heal and release them at last. Until such
deep healing takes place, you cannot recover the freedom that is intrinsic to
Mind, and Love cannot bless you and take you Home. 

There is within every mind, no matter how lost in the darkness of separation, a
small voice that cries out unceasingly for its Home in God. Drowned out by the
noise of the world and the continuous stream of egoic thoughts, feelings,
desires, and impulses, it waits alone and forlorn for you to hear it and
respond. 

If you would know your Father again, and your Self, you must devote yourself to
the task. It is a tribute to the power of mind to decide that you have decided
against being what you are in Truth, and experience you are what you are not in
Its place. You can just as well, and with far happier results, decide against
being what you are not, and choose again to be the Self. You must learn to make
this consistent choice in place of the ego-determined choices that have
controlled your mind, and made your Self a stranger to you. 

What could be stranger than not to know the Self you are, and play at being
something else instead? Eventually everyone will tire of this masquerade, this
play of being what you are not, and take off the mask that hides the face of
Christ. That day can come sooner rather than later if you truly want it. Why
delay and cause yourself much needless suffering? 

## The Refusal to Compromise
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

You are writing the story of your life as you go along. You think things just
happen to you over which you have no control. Yet nothing happens that you do
not ask for, and nothing is done to you without your consent. The picture you
would maintain of an external world of separate objects and shadowy figures,
each with its own existence apart from all others, is a fiction constructed in
your mind. The consequences of the ideas you want to be true are projected
outward, and looked upon through the body’s eyes, as if they were not of your
making. They appear to make a world in which you find yourself, and “prove”
separation real, Unity impossible, and defense necessary as a “sane” response
to the threats you see all around you. The part you play in the making of the
world is hidden from awareness, and thus you seem to be the effect of the world
you see, and not its cause. If you were its effect, you would be lost indeed,
forever helpless. As its cause however, you can change your mind, and the world
you see will change accordingly. Nothing holds you in the world of battle but
your own decision. To think otherwise is folly. 

You can leave the world of illusion any time you choose, but this choice must
be total. To choose rightly, you must become aware of your many attachments to
the things and pleasures of this world, including the self, the bodily identity
you hold so dear. Ultimately must everything you value here be given up, for
there is no room for Truth in your mind as long as illusion is cherished in any
form. To cling to one illusion is to keep them all, for illusion, like Truth,
is total, and never do they meet. No compromise is possible here, although you
will try a thousand times, and then a thousand more. When all compromise has
been exhausted and given up, you will be ready for Truth’s return. 

Forgiveness is the refusal to compromise Truth no matter what the appearance.
Your brother is guiltless, innocent. Like you, he always has been and always
will be, for so were you created, and as you were created, you remain for all
Eternity. This does not change in time where God’s Son appears to be a body,
capable of attack. You are not a body, but remain as you were created by God.
No matter what the body appears to do, is this true. 

The mind of forgiveness remembers the Truth that his brother is, and overlooks
the body and its deeds. There is nothing to forgive for all that seems to
happen, the attack and the injury done, is but a dream, the idle play of
illusion. You cannot attack, and you cannot be attacked. Nothing real can be
affected in any way by your dreaming. Forgiveness merely acknowledges what is
true, everywhere and always. 

Thus is forgiveness the antidote to the belief in sin and guilt. It overlooks
all illusion, no matter what the form, and sees instead the Truth that is not
contained within a body. Without forgiveness, are sin and death real, and you
will not escape the effects of this sad belief. The choice, as always, is yours
to make, and what you choose will rule your life. Whenever you prefer illusion
to Truth, will sadness be your lot, and life will be a joyless affair. Decide
for Truth, and each time you do so, will bring you one step closer to Heaven
and the release from all pain and limitation. 

Forgiveness too is illusion, but it is the illusion that replaces all others.
Unlike other illusions, forgiveness does not perpetuate illusion, but gently
brings them all into itself, until only Love remains. As it does so, is the
mind healed and returned to Wholeness. Forgiveness is an expression of the
highest Love as reflected on earth; under its gentle gaze is separation healed
and the mind brought closer to Heaven. More than that it cannot do, but that is
enough. Your Father will do the rest. 

## Spiritual Vision
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

What are the results of your thinking? The experiences of your life, its
conditions and circumstances, follow directly and are determined by your
habitual thoughts and beliefs. The world you see and experience is their
expression, reflecting back to you what you believe is true, and what you want
to see. The world that seems to arise all about you, is not independent of your
thoughts. Thought makes this world and thought maintains it. Trying to change
the world is bound to fail, for it is but an effect. Rather, change your mind
about the world, about its purpose, and you will see differently. 

The world cannot but reflect what you want to see. If you want to see Truth
reflected there, you must allow the Holy Spirit to give the world His purpose.
He does this in your mind, and your perception will change accordingly. If your
aim is to prove separation real, and sin, guilt, and fear, part of that
reality, then this is what you will see. If you want to see the Word of God
written across the world and Heaven reflected there, so will your vision be.
Behind every apparent form, Truth waits to greet you. 

The Divine Light shines forth from everything that lives, but you must be
willing to see It. The Holy Spirit holds spiritual vision, the Vision of
Christ, for you until you are ready to use It, and will give It to you as soon
as you let him. When the mind has been sufficiently purified, true Vision will
be yours. The purpose of spiritual vision is to show forth the Light that is in
you and in your brother. The vision of this Light, the unmistakable seeing, is
a tangible demonstration of the existence of the spiritual within you and all
things. In that demonstration is the Unity of you and your brother made
obvious, and separation proved false. The Light in you is the same Light you
see in your brother, and as It joins you together beyond the body, are you
blessed as One.

Spiritual vision takes perception beyond the “seeing” of the body’s eyes, and
shows you Truth’s reflection in the dream. The Vision of Christ is still
illusion, for all states of perception must be illusory. Yet is It a unified
perception, Whose Wholeness is like unto the Unity of direct knowledge that is
the Kingdom of God. In the mirror of Christ’s Vision is Truth reflected, and
are you brought close enough that It can flow across the little gap between
perception and the knowledge of Truth, and restore you to Heaven. When this
occurs, is the journey through time brought to a close, as there is no more
need for a body or a world. This will happen of itself when you are ready.
Until then, you must maintain the commitment to Truth and the spiritual
discipline and practice that heal the mind and restore it to Wholeness. 

## Spiritual Practice
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Whatever you choose to believe is then true for you. You will believe what you
want to believe, what you want to be true. Argument and logic may be used to
prove it true, and so apparently convince yourself, but your mind has already
decided on the outcome it wants. The desire to have it be true, lies behind all
belief systems. This is never in question. There is however, an important
question that must be asked, and answered. Do you want to believe what is true
because It is Truth Itself, beyond doubt, argument, uncertain logic, or human
desire? Do you want to believe what is true, in and of Itself, whether believed
in or not? 

The Truth is the Truth because It’s true. That is all that can be said about
It. The Truth is beyond clever arguments for or against, beyond logic and so
called “facts,” beyond all human thinking, believing, perceiving, and desire.
The Truth was created by God Who is Truth and the Source of all that is true.
There is nothing more that can be meaningfully said about It. The Truth is the
Truth because It’s true, and anything that is not Truth is not true. This
follows from the first statement and completes it. What is true is true, and
what is not true is not true. This may seem too obvious to need be stated, but
it is the obvious, direct, and simple that is lost or obscured by the
complexity and conflict that cloud the human mind. 

Truth is direct, simple, and singular or One. If this were grasped directly and
understood, there would be no need for the teaching of concepts and ideas. For
how many is this true? For most is the conceptual teaching necessary until the
end of learning is attained. After this, concepts fall away, for Truth will
return to claim Its own. Until then is conceptual understanding needed,
although its importance should not be overemphasized. Indeed, real
understanding of the concepts presented in authentic spiritual teachings, such
as *A Course in Miracles*, comes only through direct experience of the ideas
themselves. The true ideas presented in the Course, represent real experience,
direct experience, that is not simply mentation or thinking. Conceptual
understanding is just a step that will help bring you to the point where
experience and direct seeing, or insight, will take over. 

The aim of spiritual practice is to bring you to the place where you go beyond
the mind as you know it, and enter the realm of spiritual experience. Even
there however, the need for spiritual focus and practice continues until the
mind is completely healed, and restored to its natural state of resting in God. 

Spiritual practice itself can be said to have two parts or two legs on which it
stands. These two parts complement and support each other, and are both
necessary for awakening. The workbook for *A Course in Miracles* illustrates
these two factors clearly. 

First is the practice that is done in quietness and solitude at special times
during the day. This can be simple or more abstract contemplation on key ideas;
reading the teaching for the purpose of further understanding; special practice
or focus on forgiving, on seeing the Light, or other related practice; or
retreating into quietness and stillness beyond the “normal” activity of the
mind, often called meditation. During these special times, your mind is focused
exclusively on the practice, without the demands or distractions of everyday
life, and this allows an in depth focus on and experience of the teaching. This
is invaluable, and the state of mind thus attained can be brought into your
daily life. This practice helps you to establish, remember, and stabilize the
constant application of the teaching. 

The second part of spiritual practice is the constant remembering of your true
purpose, to awaken to the Truth of what you are. This must go on constantly
throughout the day, even into sleep. Even if not constant, you must as often,
as consistently as you can, remember the Truth, be aware of your choosing, and
side with Truth as often as possible. 

Your mind is constantly active, constantly thinking, constantly choosing, and
is ruled by its past habits, tendencies, and experiences. Unless corrected it
will simply repeat the past and reinforce the hold the past has on the present.
You must continually correct your mind in the present by being aware of its
activity, and consciously choosing what is true, again and again, with the help
of the Holy Spirit. This constant correction is fundamental and absolutely
necessary. 

The spiritual process, the process of undoing, of correcting your mind, and
returning it to its true condition, must be a constant antidote or counter
action to the habitual, false activity of the ego mind. Mind must be corrected
moment to moment, for it is always active and always choosing. While it is left
to do what it has always done, it will choose illusion until you decide
otherwise; and every false choice will strengthen the bonds that have held you
prisoner for so long. 

Despite your imprisonment, there is still one freedom left to you, the freedom
to choose, but you must exercise this freedom consciously. You cannot allow the
past to go on choosing for you, if you want a different future. The past is
over and gone, and never did it bring you anything but uncertainty and loss.
This is the ego’s gift to you: pain disguised as pleasure, loss as gain, and
death as life. Do not continue down the well-worn path to oblivion, for you
have been long enough in hell. Lift your gaze and look upon Heaven. It waits on
your return for It is not complete without you. Your mind is yours to rule and
no one can take that responsibility from you, not God Himself. Take
responsibility back from the ego, and direct your mind towards Truth.

