---
ref: "Chapter Twelve"
title: "The Peace of God"
---

Peace is the natural condition of the mind when resting in its true nature. A
mind not at peace is a mind at war with itself, for the absence of peace is
fear. A state of mind in which fear is active, whether you are conscious of it
or not, is a state of conflict. Conflict must always be present in your mind
before it can be projected and appear outwardly. All outer conflict is simply a
projection of the conflict within.

If you would be at peace, you must renounce conflict, the belief in attack. To
give up attack is to withdraw your belief that you gain something thereby, and
recognize that only loss can come of it. You must also relinquish the belief
that you can be attacked. In truth, you cannot attack or be attacked; to
discover this fact you must lay down all defenses. All desire to harm another,
and the belief that you can be harmed, disappear when you lay down all
defenses. Defense and attack go together; to give up one entirely is to give up
the other as well.

When peace prevails in your mind, you are resting in the strength of Christ.
The Christ in you is entirely without need or belief in attack, for It is not a
body, and only bodies attack and defend. The Christ is Love only; in Love is
found no attack, for Love encompasses all. There is no attack or defense when
all is recognized as part of you, for perceived threat can only come from
without, and nothing is outside of you or apart. The Christ in you, the Self,
is One and includes all, for every mind is whole and contains all minds.

To realize this Oneness, to come to the clear understanding of this fact of
your Being, requires direct experience of Truth beyond concepts, beyond
thinking, beyond body and mind. This is a unitary experience beyond perception,
beyond the duality of conceptual thinking. As such it cannot be described or
captured by thought in any way; it is a completely different kind of experience
that can only be given or revealed in your awareness. 

The Truth of what you are dawns directly in your mind when you have been made
ready. The purpose of spiritual practice, of spiritual discipline, is to bring
you to this point of readiness. Whenever you choose Truth over illusion, Love
over fear, the Holy Spirit’s direction over the ego’s, you take another step
closer to that moment. There is no other direction to travel than towards this
moment of Truth, for all other roads are but variations of the road to nowhere.
To travel towards illusory destinations is not to travel at all; all journeys
undertaken within a dream are but imagination. Truth will prevail in the end as
all illusion falls away, and what was always there shines forth clearly in your
mind as you.

The attainment of a steady and constant state of peace, can be said to be the
goal of *A Course in Miracles*. A peaceful mind is quiet, and a quiet mind easily
attains the condition in which God is remembered. A peaceful mind is happy and
shares its happiness with everyone. A peaceful mind is kind, for it looks on
everyone as itself. Its gratitude is offered to all, for it perceives the gifts
it is constantly receiving from its brothers. Love and kindness are the
hallmarks of a peaceful mind, offered to all its brothers without conditions,
asking nothing in return.

When you desire only the Peace of God, It will be yours. God does not withhold
His Gifts from His willing Sons. The absence of the Gifts of God in your life,
in your awareness, is not because They have not been given. The mind must be
made ready and empty, that it may accept Them. You must truly want Them, and be
ready to meet the conditions under which you can become aware of what has
already been given. They are waiting for your acceptance, nothing more. To be
ready and open to receive the Gifts of God, is to make a place in your mind
emptied of all illusion, pure and silent, wherein recognition can arise.

## Awakening From the Dream
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

The only things lacking in your life are what you have refused to acknowledge.
God gave you everything in your creation, and still is this true, even in this
world. All apparent lack, all unmet needs, are but wrong choices you have made.
Everything you need is given, if you allow it. This requires you however, to
turn decision making over to the One Whose function it is. He alone has the
knowledge to choose rightly, for He alone knows what is in your best interest.
Your reliance on yourself to decide, which is to decide with the ego, has led
to uncertainty, inconsistency, and variable results. To decide with the Holy
Spirit is to always have what you truly need, and lack nothing.

If you do not actually perceive, are not aware of, your own best interest, how
can you make the decisions that will result in happiness and true fulfillment?
Certainly, if you look at your life honestly, recalling your many decisions
over the years, it is apparent that you have made less than optimum choices on
a regular basis. Just this self-honesty applied to your mind and your life in
general, will demonstrate clearly the need for another way of thinking, of
deciding, of living. And just as clearly evident is the necessity for help to
make this change, as you cannot make the necessary changes from the level of
mind on which you operate.

The recognition that fundamental change is needed and you must be helped by a
Higher Power, opens the mind to receive this help from the Holy Spirit. You
cannot find your way out of the prison you have constructed for yourself and
the world alone; the self-identity you have invented, from which your thinking
and perceiving arise, denies Truth and defends itself against It.

If you would escape bondage and allow the return of freedom, the willingness to
renounce your very self-identity must develop, and it will be developed in
time. You are simply giving up what was never real and has been the cause of
ignorance, fear, pain, suffering, and death. The self you have made has never
given you anything of lasting value; its meaningless gifts have taken the place
of what God gave you in your creation. The Self you truly are is so far beyond
the self you have made, that were you to become aware of this fact, you would
see immediately that to give up the self is no sacrifice.

The Holy Spirit guides you through the process of undoing all the illusion and
falsity that distort and cloud your mind. He guides your learning as you learn
to see what is true, what is illusion, and the difference between them. The
more important this is to you, the faster you will learn, and the greater will
be the rewards.

Nothing you do in this world is as meaningful as returning your mind to
Wholeness, awakening from the dream of separation. You do this not for yourself
alone, for in every awakening are all minds blessed equally, and the way is
made a little shorter for those who still dream. You will not leave this world
alone, for all your brothers are joined with you in the one Unity that is
eternal.

Now is the time to awaken! Time is growing short and the world has grown weary
of conflict and death. Your brothers are tired of following the same well-worn
path that leads nowhere and ends only in death. Their weary hearts cry out for
relief from pain and suffering, from the burden of sorrow that weighs them down
and darkens all the days of their lives. You hold the key that releases them
from evil dreams and terrible fates. Yet you cannot give it until you have
accepted it for yourself, until it has become yours.

Forgiveness is the key that will release every heart from the bondage of
separation. The mind that accepts forgiveness as its function here, will be set
free to return to its true Home. Forgiveness, practiced truly and consistently,
returns your mind to Love; those who are given to Love know not sorrow. Heaven
waits only on your decision to forgive a world of sin and guilt, and thus bring
Love to a world where Love is denied.

## A Call for Love
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

This is your world in all respects: it is an invention and projection of your
mind, in which each plays the part assigned to him in your dream. Who but you,
its maker, can save it? You are the hero of your own dream, following a path
laid down so long ago, even the memory of it has been lost. You need not follow
this path unto the end, for you can leave any time you choose. Yet must this
choice be total and final.

Until that moment comes, you must forgive the world and everyone and everything
in it; thus do you save yourself and the world. The world was made as a place
of separation, where fear rules and Love is absent. Only Love can save the
world, for the world was made as a replacement for the Love of God. God’s Love
cannot be lost except in dreams; Love’s return shines away all dreams forever.

No matter who or what you appear to be forgiving, you are always and only
forgiving yourself. There is no one else to forgive, for even mind asleep is
still One. All you see is in you, and you are in all you see; it has always
been so. Always it is only yourself you attack, and only yourself you forgive.
As this fact becomes increasingly clear to you, the practice of forgiveness
becomes easier. Forgiveness becomes self-evidently the only thing to do in all
circumstances, at all times.

As you learn to see all unloving acts as simply a call for Love, to give Love
will be your natural response. The more Love you give, the more Love you will
have, and it will become obvious to you that you are Love and that Love is all
there is. To live as an exemplar of Love in a loveless place, a bright and
shining Light in a world of great darkness, is a great responsibility and a
great privilege.

It is the privilege of the forgiven to forgive. To know you are forgiven, you
are guiltless, you must deny sin and guilt in all the forms in which they seem
to appear. Only thus will you come to know that sin and guilt do not exist. You
must see your brothers as guiltless to know that you too are forgiven. As you
see your brother, so will you see yourself; you and your brother are guilty or
guiltless together, for what is true of one is true of all others.

The Oneness of all of God’s Creation prevails even in this world, although in
distorted form. You think you see difference and variation, and in this world
they appear to be real, yet this is but dreaming. In a dream of time,
differences appear, yet is all difference temporary and will disappear when the
dream is over. God’s Son is One, now and forever; nothing can ever change or
affect Oneness however it may appear in dreams.

## The Truth and Dreams 
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Why do dreams seem more real than the Truth? The Truth was forgotten, driven
from the mind of God’s Son so long ago that dreaming has become the only
experience you remember. The mind identifies with what it believes, and it
believes what it experiences. This becomes a closed circle in which you see
what you want to be true, and believe it true because you see it. Thus desire
becomes experience, experience leads to belief, and you cannot see beyond it.
To question the reality you see from within this closed circle seems to be but
madness. Questioning must come from a place outside the circle, if it is to be
effective. 

The Holy Spirit leads you gently along the path of questioning the “reality”
you have believed in for so long. He will not snatch it from you, but will
rather demonstrate through your relationship with Him, there are other laws,
higher laws. Eventually you will discover these spiritual laws alone are true,
and all other laws you thought you obeyed for so long are but the stuff of
dreams.

When the dreamlike nature of this world begins to be apparent to you, the fixed
belief in the “reality” you see will lose its hold on your mind. Through the
opening that has been made, the Holy Spirit can gently lead you to a new
experience of yourself and the world. This repeated demonstration of what is
true and yet beyond the world you see will, in time, undo your belief in the
reality of the world, and make room for true understanding to take its place.

The mind can only experience what it is willing to experience. Once the
willingness to know Truth again is established, the way lies open before you.
The Self returns to your awareness when you are willing to give up the self you
have made. The recognition that the world you see is not the reality you seek,
but rather is the defense against it, will, if truly accepted, begin the
process of returning your Self to your awareness.

The return of the Self is truly cause for celebration, for it is the return of
freedom from bondage, and it heralds the return of God’s Son to His Father’s
Kingdom. To experience yourself as you really are, as the Self, is far beyond
all the pleasures and amusements of this world. In Its Presence, they fade into
the nothingness they have always been.

You have never really wanted the self you have made. It is, to say the least, a
pitiful thing, identified with a fragile body destined to sicken and die. Prone
to suffer, under constant threat, frozen in a configuration of attack and
defense, the self is cut off and isolated from its brothers by the belief in
separation. It offers you neither certainty nor safety. Its belief in the
“reality” of death casts a shadow across your entire life, sorrow marking your
every step in the long and weary journey from birth to death.

## Give Up the World
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Thank your Father and the Holy Spirit that none of this is true! Thank the Holy
Spirit Who leads you out of this senseless and pitiless maze. Thank the Self,
the Christ in you, Who has never been affected in the least by the apparent
experiences of the dream. And thank your brothers, created One with you, who
offer you the role of savior until they are ready to accept this responsibility
themselves. Through the acceptance of this role, you take responsibility for
the healing of the world and everything in it, and through the healing you
offer to all, are you healed. You cannot be healed alone, for healing, which is
the return to Wholeness, is for all; each mind which accepts healing, accepts
it for all. The savior of the world extends the healing he has received to all,
thus is he healed.

When healing is all you offer to your brothers, at all times, in every
circumstance, healing is made complete. Only the return of your mind to perfect
Wholeness is healing; in Wholeness is no illusion, and it is only illusions
that must be healed. When all illusions that darken and limit your mind have
been undone, you will leave this world forever.

The belief in illusion, and the constant choices maintaining it, keep the world
of separation before your eyes, seeming to be the place where you find
yourself. Give up all investment in illusion, through the recognition it is not
true and offers you only continuing pain, suffering, and sorrow, and the Truth
will once again shine forth in your mind as you. And never again will you be
fooled by the meaningless gifts the ego offers.

You chose to deceive yourself about what you are long ago, and the memory of
that has been your reality for too long. Now is the time for you and your
brothers to remember the Truth rather than illusion, and choose accordingly.
You never wanted to suffer, to live a prisoner in a dream of death. It was
simply an error and can be undone at any time, if you so decide.

Nothing is lost by giving up the world; you gain everything thereby. It cannot
be difficult to choose between everything and nothing, when once you see each
for what it is and the difference between them. The willful failure to clearly
discern Truth from illusion, and the resulting confusion, but seems to make the
choice difficult. When once you make the commitment to realize the Truth of
what you are, to let go all illusion, you will be helped and guided back to
your true Home in Heaven.

The only meaningful goal in this world is to learn the difference between Truth
and illusion. This is a process usually requiring a lengthy period of learning
that takes place day by day, as you learn through your experience. The Holy
Spirit must guide this endeavor, and trust in Him is essential. You do not
understand the difference between Truth and illusion; thus you are unable to
recognize them as they are.

You do not know how to learn in the spiritual sense, for it is a very different
kind of learning than what you know. You must learn how to learn, and learn to
see and understand in a new way. Unlike worldly learning, lessons are not
restricted to certain times, nor do they take place only under certain
conditions. Your very life, everything that happens, all your relationships of
any kind, all thoughts, feelings, and desires; all of this is the material of
which your lessons are composed, and learning goes on continuously without
interruption. There are no days off or holidays.

If you would learn what the Holy Spirit would teach, just this willingness, and
the commitment it engenders, must be developed. Your mind is based on illusion,
your identity depends on it, your experience is shaped by it. Mind is
constantly busy and through its habitual and unconscious tendencies, is
maintaining and perpetuating an illusory world and identity. Nothing less than
a commitment that is continuously active, and an unceasing desire for Truth,
will provide the willingness through which illusion is undone and the mind made
ready to welcome Truth. The Holy Spirit needs your willingness; He can do
nothing without it.

The willingness to be healed, to let the Truth return and take Its rightful
place, is all you truly need. Nothing more, but also nothing less. Since the
mind was split, separated from its Source, the will has been imprisoned. It
cannot truly function unless Mind is whole. The active willingness necessary
for salvation enables the mind to be returned to Wholeness, and liberates the
imprisoned will. There is no true exercise of will in a world of separation,
for will, like Love, is absent when the mind is split.

## Two Treasures
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Do you really need all the things you want and seem to find necessary? How many
of the various objects and conditions you seek will bring you true happiness?
Has anything you have ever done, any goals you have attained no matter how
lofty, any possessions or conditions of life you have established, brought you
true and lasting happiness? Does continuing down the same path, doing what has
never brought happiness before, bring any hope of a different result?

The mind is blinded by desire, crippled by fear, and distorted by greed; this
is its true condition in the world of separation. How can you, while in this
condition, be capable of good and rational decisions? The only rational
decision you can make is to decide not to decide, to turn over decision making
to the Holy Spirit. He will decide rightly for you, and for everyone affected
by any decision you make. To decide by yourself, using the past as your guide,
is to decide self-destructively. To so decide is to act in concert with the
ego; this is never in your best interest. The ego will always direct you so as
to maintain separation and deny Love. Doing so is the cause of all the pain,
misery, and loneliness that marks your life.

By the way you live, by the lessons you learn, is your life shaped and
determined. All that happens is but response to what you value and what you
desire. Value and desire only what is true, and you will be blessed with joy,
peace, Love, and freedom. Continue the futile chase after the things of this
world and, however hard you may try, no matter how successful you may be,
happiness will elude you, and sorrow and loss will be your reward.

Whatever you really want, what attracts your mind and keeps it fixed on itself,
will dominate you and control your life. What is valued by you above all else
will be your treasure, and where your treasure is, your heart is also. Be very
careful about what you treasure; it will be the cornerstone upon which your
life is established. Treasure illusion in any form, no matter how attractive,
and you are treasuring death, for that is where illusion always leads; and fear
and suffering will precede you and prepare the way. Desire instead with all
your heart the Truth, and Truth only, and you will be restored to Life eternal.
These are the only two treasures there are or ever will be.

Illusion comes in many forms but the content is always the same. Do not allow
the many forms in which illusion appears, to blind you to what you really
choose: death. No matter how attractive the wrapping, is death still death. You
deserve life though the ego believes you merit only death. Do not listen to its
voice, for it knows nothing and leads you nowhere.

## Two Voices
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

The ego’s voice must be clearly identified in your mind, that you may choose
against it. This takes much dedication and perseverance, for you have
identified yourself with the ego for a very long time. The Holy Spirit will
work carefully with you, teaching you to become aware of the two voices to
which you can listen. If you allow Him, He will speak to you clearly, in
response to every need and request. His counsel is always gentle, never
demanding; His quiet voice will always give you the answer that is needed. As
you learn to trust, you will ask for His direction in all that you do, for His
guidance is what you need.

To teach you the difference between the two voices, and the results that follow
your choice for one or the other, is the Holy Spirit’s function. If you will
honestly listen and apply what He teaches you, you will learn to recognize the
ego’s voice and all the ways it speaks to you. Through thoughts, feelings,
emotions, perceptions, impulses, and desires, it constantly shapes your mind
and controls your actions. All response arising from conscious or unconscious
egoic identification, will always perpetuate the past and reinforce bondage and
limitation.

Identification with the ego is so constant, habitual, and deeply ingrained,
that much help, commitment, and effort are required to free the mind. The ego
is nothing in itself, yet the power of belief and long association give it
seeming strength and persistence. So long accustomed to turning your mind over
to the machinery of the belief system of separation, you cannot see anything
else.

The Holy Spirit will help undo the attachment to imprisonment, if that be your
true desire, and you give Him your willingness. To identify with the ego is to
willingly support your imprisonment, for to do so is to give your energy to its
perpetuation. Only the energy of your mind, through the power of belief, limits
you. You have chosen to identify yourself as a body in separation, with all
that entails; and only your choice can set you free to be what you are in
Truth. To continue the error in identification that prevents freedom and
assures the continuation of fear and separation, is surely insanity. If you
have been practicing A Course in Miracles, you have come far enough along to
recognize this by now.

Sanity’s response to illusion, to all that causes pain, suffering, and
limitation, is to choose against it. The Holy Spirit will guide every response
away from falsity, towards Truth, strongly reinforcing it through the results
He brings. You need not know how He does it, indeed you cannot know, for the
miracle comes from beyond human consciousness. The mind given to the return of
sanity, needs the help the Holy Spirit gives from beyond the circle of insanity
that holds you prisoner. The decision is still yours to make, for your free
will cannot be infringed upon, yet is help needed to understand what must be
done and to do it. To your willingness is added His, to strengthen it and
establish stability. When mind is split, will is imprisoned. The willingness to
return to the Kingdom must be developed within, and nurtured and strengthened
through commitment and perseverance. Through right learning is the mind made
ready to choose only what is true.

## Your Single Purpose
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

The best thing you can do is to do nothing. To recognize this fact is to
realize that your efforts are not needed. All egoically directed effort, no
matter how well-intentioned, is an attempt to add to God’s Plan which is
already perfect. To attempt to add to His Plan is to interfere with It, and
prevent It from accomplishing Its goal of setting you free.

The Great Plan of Atonement is an undoing, not a doing; your one responsibility
is to accept It for yourself. The recognition that you know nothing is
essential, if you are to turn over decision making to the Holy Spirit. To
recognize you know nothing, is to realize you can do nothing to help the Holy
Spirit, for all effective action rests on right understanding. Your
cooperation, commitment, and willingness, are all that is required of you. You
need not do more than your part, but you must not do less.

If you are intent on returning to your true state, this intention must rule the
conditions of your life. Unwavering intention directed by a single purpose will
be successful in time. How long, is determined by the strength of your
commitment and perseverance. To give yourself to the process of salvation
unreservedly, to turn your life and will over to God, will shorten time
immeasurably. There is nothing you cannot do with the help of the Holy Spirit.
He is waiting for just this total giving of yourself to the higher purpose, to
God, for that allows Him to give you all the Gifts of God He has been keeping
for you since time began.

When God is all you want, when returning to your Home in Heaven is the single
purpose around which your life revolves, all will be given you. Until this
single focus of dedication has been attained, you have not asked for all help
in Heaven and earth, and thus are not open to receive it. The openness, the
desire, and the willingness to receive, are necessary to receive anything.
Nothing can be given you against your will; *Ask and you shall receive* is a
simple statement of this fact. Everything you ask for is given you, even in
this world; it matters not whether you are conscious of the request. All
requests of mind receive the appropriate response; that is the law of mind.

To become completely aware of what you are asking for at all times is one of
the goals of the mind training of *A Course in Miracles*. If your requests are
always met, and you do not like what you are getting, then you must cease
asking for what you do not want, for what causes you pain. To do this requires
a constant vigilance, a continuous self-awareness.

To know your mind, not in a static way based on analysis or conceptualization,
but as it is moment to moment in its activity, its aliveness, is essential.
This is what I am referring to in *A Course in Miracles* when I say, “An
untrained mind can do nothing.” To know your mind as it is, in action, in life,
makes possible the conscious exercise of choice. You cannot consistently make
right choices unless you are aware that your mind is constantly choosing, and
are aware of what it is choosing.

The mind of separation, lost in ignorance and unawareness, is dominated by its
habitual tendencies and thought patterns. They were established in the past,
and their function is to seemingly keep the past alive in the present, thus
replacing any possibility of real present awareness with a static configuration
of thought, feeling, and behavior that was established long ago. Yet the past
is over and no longer here. To operate as if it is, and this is what you do
when you identify with the ego’s thought system, is to reject the very life of
your Being.

Life Itself, Reality Itself, is of the present, and only the present; only the
present is real, for it is in the present that Eternity meets time. To bring
your awareness into the present is a major goal of the mind training. You exist
only here and now; only in the present moment can correction of the mind take
place and real learning be established.

## Sanity and Responsibility
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

The mind of ignorance is in a state of illusory separation from itself. A mind
that does not know itself, its Reality, is ignorant in the most profound and
basic sense. Surely it is fantastic, and seemingly highly improbable, that you
would not know who or what you truly are. Yet this is exactly the condition in
which the mind of separation finds itself. You have taught yourself that you
are what you could never be, and are not what you could never not be. This is
quite amazing in itself, but rather than devote more time to admiring what you
have done, let us devote your time and energy to undoing the error, that you
may return to sanity and be your Self again.

The responsibility for the return to the Kingdom is yours alone. All help will
be given you, if you will only ask. There is nothing you cannot do with the
help of the Holy Spirit; He returns to you the power of mind and understanding
that has been lost from awareness. Whatever else you may do, there is one thing
at which you cannot fail: You cannot fail to be the Self created by God. No
matter what your experience now, it is only a matter of time before the memory
of your Father returns to your awareness and sets you free. In truth, it has
already happened, though in your journey through time, it appears as if you
have not yet reached this point.

Time is but illusion, a game of shadows you play with yourself until you tire
of it. The figures that seem to come and go, the events seemingly happening
around you, are but phantom projections of the belief in separation. The world
you see exists in your mind only, and is maintained by thought. Change your
thoughts about the world, let all illusion in your mind be undone, and the
world will change accordingly. There is no world without you, and only by
offering freedom to all you see, is freedom restored to you. No one leaves here
alone; in your liberation from bondage are all your brothers included. No one
will be left behind.

The purpose of life is to discover who you are, not as an ego identity, but who
you are in your totality as God’s Holy Son. There is no other purpose to life
in this world worthy of you. The shiny baubles offered by the ego to distract
you from your true purpose, have no real or lasting value. Until this is
clearly understood, you will waste much time chasing nothingness and prolong
the suffering inherent in the valuing of illusion.

Nothing in the world of separation offers anything you truly want, anything
that is not empty and devoid of true fulfillment. Not until this is deeply
understood and accepted, are you willing to let go all attachment to the things
and experiences of this world. So long as you value and desire anything here,
will you be a willing prisoner of what you have made. Illusion is one; to
desire any part of it is to have all of it. While you try to hold onto this
world in any way, the idea of sacrifice will rule your mind.

The Holy Spirit does not try to take anything you value from you. He simply
teaches that what you value and cling to so tightly, is valueless. To awaken
from the dream and leave the world forever, does not require that you give up
what is real and meaningful. Nothing that you see is real, or has any value in
itself whatsoever. Awakening simply requires you to recognize and accept this
fact as self-evident. To give up what was never real, what has never been other
than worthless, is surely not a sacrifice. To relinquish what brings only fear,
pain, and suffering, cannot result in loss. Only the mind still hypnotized by
the illusory play of images, lost in its own dream projections, would think
otherwise.

The return of sanity to your mind is the recognition of what is real, true, and
completely desirable, and what is illusion, false, and completely worthless.
Sanity must include the consistent clarity to tell the difference between Truth
and illusion, at all times and in all situations. The action of sanity is to
choose only Truth and reject illusion. A sane mind will never do what will hurt
you or anyone else. When your mind is restored to sanity, it will operate from
Love, as Love, and will refuse entry to fear in any form.

Fear itself is insanity, as it leads to attack and defense against what does
not exist. All hallucinations, all imagery, all projections of what has no
basis in Truth, arise from and are sustained by fear. The wish to be as you are
not, to be other than what God created as you, has its origin in the fearful
response to the original error of separation.

Sanity is the condition of mind in which Love operates and fear is absent. Each
mind must choose, each and every moment, whether to live sanely and extend Love
to all, or to lose itself in the chaos of insanity and let itself be ruled by
fear.

## Commitment and Salvation
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Whenever the time is right, salvation will come; it is available each and every
moment it is truly desired. Through your decisions, your choices, you accept or
reject the salvation that is always available. A choice for Truth, for Love,
<span class="under">is</span> a decision to accept salvation, just as a choice
for illusion, for the ego, is a rejection of it. Salvation is the result of an
irrevocable decision for Truth, a commitment that is unshakeable. Nothing can
come between you and what you truly want with all your heart.

The journey back to Truth is marked by a growing sense of commitment, a
constantly strengthening intent to realize Truth, to return to your Father,
that becomes your single purpose. As investment is withdrawn from the ego, from
bodily identification, the mind is progressively freed of habitual tendencies,
of the past, and allowed to return to its true nature as freedom and presence
here and now.

As ego, you are never really in the present except as the resistance to it. The
mind misidentified as a body, a separate entity in time and space, is the
denial of the Self, of Truth. As the Self is always and only in the present,
the resistance to being truly present, a fundamental characteristic of the ego,
is also an effective defense against the Truth. The ego uses time to maintain
the illusion by keeping alive the past and using it to cover over and avoid the
present, thus perpetuating a future that is the continuation of the past.

The Holy Spirit uses time in a completely different manner; He guides you so as
to undo the past in the present and thus set the future free. By returning you
to the present, the only time there is, are you enabled to reunite with your
Self which is timeless. The skillful use of time is essential, if you are to
escape from it. The seemingly endless and inexorable march of time in a
continuous sequence of past, present, and future, holds you in a trap that
appears real and beyond your control. Yet is time but an illusion that need not
limit you, and indeed cannot, without your consent.

Through the Holy Spirit’s direction, you are helped to establish your awareness
in the present by being constantly vigilant. This constant vigilance for Truth
and against the ego, leads eventually to freedom of mind. Through the practice
of continuous self awareness, moment to moment, you learn to know your mind as
it is, not as you imagine it to be. Only what you are aware of can be
consciously decided for or against. What is not accessible to consciousness
remains in your mind, exerting its influence. For the healing of the mind to
occur, all of its content, all its hidden corners and deep unconscious layers,
must be uncovered and brought into the Light of awareness. What is true and
helpful will be kept; what is false must be decided against and given to the
Holy Spirit to correct. Nothing else will return the mind to Wholeness.

## The Light in You
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

The Light in you is what the world longs to behold, for It shines away all
darkness. So long the darkness has covered the earth and saddened the hearts of
all who come here. The Light begins as a tiny point, barely visible, seemingly
covered over by the sleep of ignorance. Yet within this tiny point is the Light
of the world Whose function is to shine forth, illuminating the way back to
God.

First must the mind awaken from its dream, ever so little, and the Light will
shine a little brighter, like the tiny gleam of the firefly in the darkness of
the night. Let the mind go a little farther on the path towards Truth, and the
Light shines brighter still as the darkness begins to lift. Every step closer
to Truth and the Light shines still more until It becomes a bright and shining
star, set in the heavens above you, illuminating the path before you, guiding
you Home. You need not worry if you lose the way, for the Light will never
leave you; It will unerringly guide you back to the way you must walk. This
Light is part of you forever, given you by God in your creation. This natural
radiance of Mind shines brightly in Heaven and on earth. 

The Light in a mind awakening from the dream extends to other minds, dispelling
the sleep of ignorance, supporting the ongoing awakening of your brothers. You
are Light, Mind, Spirit, Love, joy. You are the One Self of all that lives.
Nothing you do or say can ever change what God created perfect as Himself. Let
your Light so shine before men that their minds may be lighted also, until all
of God’s children are joined in one great circle of joyous Light extending
forever.

Forgiveness frees your mind, allowing its Light to shine brightly. Light is the
opposite of darkness, not in truth, but in dreams of death where opposition
seems to rule. Forgiveness ends opposition, for Love does not oppose, and a
forgiving mind accepts everyone and everything as they are. Without judgement
and the need to attack, are all things acceptable, and all grounds for conflict
vanish, for guilt and judgement drive the mind to project and attack. Without
them is the mind at peace, extending its Light everywhere, shining away
darkness until only Light remains.

The mind of forgiveness shines its gentle Light on all without exceptions. When
all are forgiven and seen as guiltless, are all then seen as part of yourself.
No one is left outside for innocence extends to all, and in this foreshadowing
of the Unity of God’s Son, are all blessed equally.

Forgiveness undoes the foundation of the belief system of separation; it brings
you to the place where learning ends, and experience that is not of this world
awaits you. Forgiveness, practiced rightly and consistently applied, will heal
your mind of all guilt, of all grievances, allowing Holiness to be revealed.
You are Holiness Itself as are all of your brothers. Through forgiveness is the
guiltlessness of God’s Son made apparent, letting His innocence shine forth for
all the world to see. The world is waiting for just this sight of innocence,
that the burden of sin weighing so heavily upon it be lifted, setting it free
at last.

While you languish in sin, guilty and condemned, does the world suffer with
you; in your healing is it made whole. When guilt and sin have vanished from
the mind that cherished them awhile, does the world become a different place,
shining in the reflection of God’s Love.

We are nearing the end of our journey now, with Holiness Itself walking beside
us and the Light shining brightly in our minds for all to see. There is a Light
in your eyes, a Light that goes out to all you look upon, that blesses
everything you see. The world has forgotten this Light, yet longs for It to
return and heal all its sorrows. The Light in you has the power to heal all
sickness, all pain, and all suffering that darkens the mind of God’s Holy Son.

All illusion gives way before the Holy Light that shines in the Mind of Christ.
This Light is not of this world; It comes from Heaven, blessing all who live in
misery and separation, thinking they are what they are not. This Light cannot
be denied for It is part of Truth Itself. You who live and suffer and die in a
world ruled by fear and hate, still carry this Light within you as a tiny
spark. This spark waits but for the right conditions to blaze forth and grow
into a mighty power that will consume all illusion, all that is false, leaving
you transformed into Light Itself. 

The nature of mind is Light, Its natural creative radiance. Mind extends Itself
as Light and Love, and thus is Creation extended endlessly. Only the creations
of Light are real; the universe of Light is the province of God and your true
Home. Light, formless and infinite, conscious and eternal, <span
class="under">is</span> what you are.  Until you accept this fact, you will
continue trying to be what you are not.  Better to accept the Truth now, and
save yourself time and suffering.

All are destined to return to God for there is nowhere else to go; all other
roads lead nowhere. When you tire of the long journey that ends only in death,
you will be ready to begin the journey homeward. Your Father waits for your
return and great is the rejoicing on that day. 

