---
ref: "Chapter Eight"
title: "Love"
---

Let us review everything we have said about Love so far. Your Creator is Love,
and in your Creation were you created Love also. Love is One, encompassing all
without exception. Love is the force behind Creation for It extends Itself,
gives Itself, unceasingly. Love is whole and cannot be divided and still be
Love. Love does not go where It is unwanted. It has no opposite in truth, but
in this world there appears to be an opposite to Love, and that is fear. Love
and fear are mutually exclusive; where one is, the other is not. You are always
choosing between Love and fear with every thought, feeling, and action. Love is
a part of Truth for It is Reality Itself. Love cannot be denied for It is
everywhere, but you can choose not to see It or invite It into your mind, thus
making It inaccessible. Love must be given freely to all; It cannot be reserved
for special relationships and still be Love. If you would know Love, you must
give up all belief and investment in attack, for attack expresses and
reinforces fear, and fear drives Love from your mind.

Forgiveness is an expression of Love in this world that is like unto Love as It
is in Heaven. Through the act of forgiveness is a miracle of Love extended to
your brother, and in this miracle are you included, and both are blessed as
One. Love cannot but forgive for It is incapable of judgement and condemnation.
All stand blessed and innocent in the eyes of Love, for It sees only the
perfection and Holiness of God’s Creation everywhere.

Love will set you free to be Itself, if you will let It. Love wants to return
to your mind and restore joy to your life. You need only meet Love’s conditions
and thus invite It, to bring about Its return. Love has been absent from your
life for too long, and the pale substitution of “specialness” will never
satisfy you or take Its place. Love is wholly satisfying and complete in
Itself, and you will never be happy until Love fills your heart once again.

Peace follows Love, for where Love is found does peace prevail, and where peace
rules the mind, has Love taken Its rightful place. You cannot have one without
the other, for they are aspects of Truth, and Truth is One. The mind returned
to Truth is ruled by Love, joy, and peace forever. There is no room in such a
mind for fear, thoughts of guilt and sin, or belief in attack.

Where Love rules, where forgiveness reigns, is all illusion renounced,
recognized as the nothingness it is. The mind given back to Truth is free, even
in this world. The sorrows of the world do not weigh it down, nor does the pain
and suffering inherent in separation, affect its peace and joy. The mind awake,
sees through illusory appearances to the Light beyond them all, and under its
forgiving gaze does all suffering disappear.

Yet does all this require your willingness, for without willingness, nothing
can be done. The one gift the Holy Spirit asks of you is willingness. He takes
your little willingness and adds His, until it becomes a mighty force for
change. Through your willingness is all accomplished, and the mind purified and
made ready for Truth’s return.

To the degree that you are willing to let your mind be corrected, it will be
corrected; you will receive just as much as you are open to receive, and no
more. You are the determiner of what happens in your life; nothing happens
without your request. Your decisions for Truth set the pace of Truth’s return,
and as you begin to choose rightly and consistently, Truth draws ever closer.

Peace will not desert you when once you establish it in your mind. There is no
greater gift than peace of mind. When peace becomes the stable state of your
mind, it will radiate from you to all other minds, bringing each mind closer to
Truth. A peaceful mind is a quiet mind, dwelling in the stillness of Being. In
this stillness is God made welcome; where He is welcome He will not hesitate to
return, for it is not His Will to be separate from His Son. When your Father
takes that final step, you will leave this world forever.

Whatever you do with Love will bring blessings upon you. Love cannot but bless
the mind in which It lives, and everything It touches in any way is equally
blessed. Whatever you give, you receive. This the law that protects giver and
receiver. You must learn to give to others only what you yourself would
receive. This is another way of describing the Golden Rule: Do unto others what
you would have them do unto you. When you give only Love and kindness, you will
receive only Love.

You must learn to see the world through loving eyes, for by your thoughts do
you set the world free or reinforce its pain and suffering. You are constantly
giving to your brothers through your thoughts, not just through words and
actions. It is your thoughts from which words and actions arise. Mind is
singular, even in this world; the thoughts of one are given to all.

Guard your thoughts carefully; remember there are no private thoughts, for
every thought affects all. Let your thinking be infused with Love, arising from
Truth, from that which is highest within you. Each and every thought is your
gift to the world. Think only the thoughts whose effects you would receive. Let
your mind itself become a source of blessing to all you see, and to all the
unseen.

## The Instrument for Change
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

The mind itself is a potent instrument for change, the only one there is. All
change must take place in the mind first, for all action is a result of thought
and the resultant impulse or motivation. The thought system to which you
subscribe gives rise to, shapes, and establishes the parameters of all action.
If you want to change your experience, and thus your life, you must become
fully aware of your beliefs, conscious and unconscious, and the role they play
in determining perception and action.

The Holy Spirit must first help you to become aware of your mind and thinking
process, that you may learn the role your thoughts play in making your world.
Then He must teach you a new thought system, one that represents and points
towards Truth. Little by little, you learn the difference between thoughts that
come from Truth and uphold It, and thoughts that arise from illusion and
reinforce fear and attack. You learn that thoughts are all of a piece; any
thought that arises, supports the entire thought system of which it is a part.
Thus your choice of thoughts is total and completely representative of the
consequences of the thought system of which it is a part. As these lessons are
learned and you become aware of the difference between Truth and illusion, and
of the consequences of your choices, the motivation develops to choose truly
and wisely. This cannot fail to happen when you learn to see clearly the very
different results that follow your choice for Truth or illusion. No one can
argue with their experience when it shows consistently and unmistakably, what
follows from their decisions.

When you become committed to choosing Truth consistently, because you recognize
this is what you truly want, progress can be very rapid. As you learn to
recognize your errors more and more quickly, much time can be saved. To reach
Truth requires not only a single-minded purpose, but also a consistent ability
to discern between Truth and falsity. This requires great self-honesty and the
help of the Holy Spirit.

As you progress in your learning, there is one thing you must do, and do
consistently: You must refer decisions to the Holy Spirit. His sure direction
leads you out of the wilderness back to the promised land. You cannot find the
way yourself, for it lies beyond the reach of your mind. It is essential to
recognize this fact for until you do, you will not surrender decision making to
the One Whose function it is. You are not asked to turn it over to Him merely
because He is better at it. The decisions you make on your “own,” are actually
made in concert with the ego, and are not real decisions at all, but are rather
consistent mistakes, made repeatedly, in many variations. To choose illusion
cannot be a real choice, no matter how cleverly nothingness is concealed. 

The Holy Spirit will lead you out of hell and back to Heaven, if you let Him.
His only concern is to deliver you from fear, pain, and suffering, and restore
you to freedom, Love, and joy. He directs you always to your strength and away
from pain. You cannot do better than to listen to His requests, and act on
them.

## Pain and Guilt
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Pain is but illusion; it matters not what kind or the apparent source, be it
sickness or emotions. Pain has no basis in fact, no cause. Pain is but the sign
of mind asleep, dreaming a world of separate bodies ruled by sin and guilt. If
you were to fully realize you are dreaming, that nothing here is real, you
would laugh at pain and death as nothingness. Your forgetting of the role you
play in making the world, allows it to seem real in your experience.

“Pain is real!” shrieks the ego, for it is itself an investment in pain. All
pain starts with guilt, the cornerstone of the ego’s thought system, and fear
which is its core. Without guilt, without fear, there can be no pain, for its
source is gone. If you but denied all fear in your mind, pain would disappear
forever. To the ego, such thinking is complete insanity, for who would deny the
reality of experience as intense as pain?

Deny it you must, for illusion, like Truth, is one; and you must deny reality
to all of its forms, or illusion will not leave your mind. If you would be free
of pain and suffering, you must examine them carefully. Who or what experiences
pain? Only the body, the symbol of limited experience, feels pain. The body has
been made to be the repository for pain, and the fact that it suffers is the
“proof” that pain is real.

Yet your body is neutral in itself. It cannot feel but what you ask it to feel,
and it simply responds as you direct it, to fulfill the purpose given it. The
mind that thinks it is a body is sick indeed, and the body will suffer the
results of the mind’s mad projections. Assigned a purpose it cannot fulfill and
goals that cannot be reached, is the body attacked thereby, and pain and
sickness will follow.

When you realize you are not a body, is the body then free to be an instrument
that serves the greater purpose. When the body has but the one purpose given it
by God, to be a means of communicating Truth, its strength and health are
assured, and sickness will not strike it down.

Let not fear of pain and sickness prevent you from looking at their cause. Your
mind is cause; the thoughts you hold about your own reality have led to a world
ruled by fear, suffering, and death. If you would be free of them, you must
become aware of, and understand, the ego’s thought system and its consequences.

The reality you think you see and experience is the result of your decision.
You have forgotten the decision you made long ago, and all the ones that
followed, until it seems as if you have come to a world that exists apart from
you, indifferent to your wishes. This is not true. Your wish gave it life, and
your wishes continue its existence. There is nothing here but what you made;
all things but represent your decision to be separate from your Creator and
your Self.

You can change this decision to be separate at any time by choosing to return
to Truth and letting the Holy Spirit, with your cooperation, undo the false
ideas that make up the ego’s thought system. He will show you the thoughts, the
beliefs, you have forgotten that underlie the thought system of separation. The
belief in guilt and sin is like a deep, dark place in your mind where the sun
never shines. No song of joy echoes through its deathlike stillness, and no
kindness or mercy is ever found there.

When the love of guilt is finally renounced, Light will flood your mind and
illuminate all the darkened places ruled so long by hate and fear. When guilt
loses its attraction and sin is seen no more, a forgiven world will rise up
before your eyes to bless and be blessed. The world seen through forgiving eyes
is a world transformed, reflecting the Love and Light of God, and showing forth
the Unity of Being in Which all are joined. In this world are all loved and
forgiven, and no one is feared or condemned. This is the real world, illusion
still, yet reflecting the Truth of Heaven, and ruled by Love and mercy.

Forgiveness is the key that unlocks the door to freedom. You cannot be free if
you are lost in a dream in which you are not your Self. The human identity is
like a mask you wear to play a part you have chosen a long time ago. You have
forgotten the choice you made and remember only the mask, which has now become
your whole identity, while your real identity is lost to you. The Self is not
only lost but has now become a source of fear, for It represents the unknown
and seems to threaten the self you have made.

The ego fears the Self, although it does not know It. It does recognize
however, there is a threat to its existence it does not understand, against
which it must defend itself. The recognition and return of the Self will indeed
undo the ego, not by attacking, for Truth does not attack illusion, but simply
by shining it away. Illusion brought to Truth simply disappears, dissolving
back into nothingness.

While you identify with the ego and its chosen home, the body, you will
continue to regard your real Self as a threat to your happiness and security.
This is obviously an absurdity, as there is no happiness and security to be
found as an ego. That this is not apparent to you is equally obvious, for the
ego is very effective at keeping you busy pursuing an endless list of
non-attainable goals and non-existent satisfactions. But pursue them you must,
or so you think, and you will continue the vain attempt to find fulfillment and
happiness where they cannot be found, using means that serve but to distract
and exhaust. No one turns their back on this world while they see it as wholly
desirable.

And yet, somewhere in time, everyone will reach a point where the futility of
such a life will become apparent, where enough suffering has burdened the mind,
and the necessity to find another way to live can no longer be denied. When you
become ready to look again, to choose again, to open your mind to a real
alternative, the Holy Spirit is waiting and will offer you all the help you
will need to return to the Kingdom. 

Whenever you are ready, the journey back can begin, but not before. While this
world remains the focus of your hopes, satisfactions, and fulfillments, you
will use all the time and energy you have to go nowhere. The question you must
always ask yourself is this: What do I truly want? You need help to answer this
question in a meaningful way, for you do not perceive what is in your best
interest, and you do not know that your heart cries out for Truth. To return to
your Father and dwell once again in joy, Unity, and Love, is your single
desire. This desire lies buried and unheard amidst the activities and
distractions of this world and the ego’s constant chatter.

## The Wholeness of Love
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

The human heart has lost its understanding of Love, for it does not experience
Love as It is. The wholeness of Love and Its all encompassing nature have been
lost. It could not be otherwise, for in the separation from the Unity of Being,
fear took the place of Love and gave rise to a world of appearances and
experience in which Love was absent. Love is doubly barred from this world: a
world based on fear must, by definition, exclude Love; and, being a world of
illusion, Love cannot enter, for Love is real and is not found where illusion
rules.

Yet is Love reflected everywhere: in every loving thought, in every act of
forgiveness, in every act of kindness, and in all joining together for the good
of all. Love cannot be totally absent even here, for It remains a part of you;
the Holy Spirit keeps It safe and uses every opening in your mind to let Love
shine into your life, influencing your thoughts and actions. Through Love you
return to the Kingdom. Through the Love of God within you, you forgive; and
through Love you are set free. Nothing else will set you free, for everything
that is not Love, is not real, and illusion leads only to bondage and further
suffering.

When Love begins to return to your mind, the bonds that hold you prisoner will
begin to loosen, and you will again taste freedom. The attraction of Love is
irresistible; Its influence on your life will steadily increase, if you welcome
and remember It as often as you can. To remember Love is to look upon all with
kindly, forgiving eyes, to condemn no one, and to extend help wherever it is
needed. It is impossible for Love to turn away from distress, no matter what
the form. Love sees everyone and everything as Itself, excluding no one from
Its kindly benevolence; everywhere It looks It sees only Itself. Through Love’s
compassionate gaze is all suffering healed. 

When you have finally had enough of fear and hate, when attack holds no more
attraction and you grow weary of constant conflict, then are you ready to
invite Love back into your life. And Love will respond and return to your mind,
to the exact degree you desire It and renounce all that is not Love. Remember
that Love cannot come where It is not welcome, and where fear rules, Love is
not. Love, like Truth, does not oppose illusion, does not struggle with
opposition in any form. Love merely waits until It is invited, responding to
every sincere invitation and shining away illusion by Its very Presence. Love
simply is, and you are Love, now and forever. To welcome Love is to invite your
Self to return and restore your mind to its rightful place in the Kingdom of
God. Nothing more is asked of you, for this is all there is.

It is essential to realize that Love cannot be limited to some and withheld
from others. This behavior, very common in human life, destroys Love’s meaning.
It is typical of human relationships that some are considered “special,” and
are invested with great importance in the life of the individual. Great
emotional attachment and significance are given these relationships, and they
generally play an important role in the individual’s life. Their emotional
nature and importance is interpreted as proof of Love, and often enormous
energy and effort are expended to maintain and preserve them. That such
relationships are based on and contain Love, is not raised to question. Even
the active presence of conflict and tension is interpreted as “proof” of the
Love they contain.

Conflict and tension are proof of the absence of Love, not Its Presence. Where
there is conflict, there is fear; and where fear is, Love is not. Special
relationships, like so many human relationships, are based on a kind of
bargaining where each tries to get much and give up little. Compromise is
utilized as part of the process, in order to find a balance between competing
desires that is stable and lasting. Domination of one by the other,
manipulation through various means, and punishment inflicted upon one or the
other, are not uncommon. Yet the belief that this is Love is stubbornly upheld,
despite all evidence to the contrary.

If you would know Love, you must first learn what It is not, and learn to
recognize Its absence. While you believe in the world’s version of love and
seek to find it in forms based on its denial, you will drive Love from your
mind and make Its return impossible. Love cannot be found by limiting It to a
few specially chosen ones, and withholding It from all others. Love is
unconditional; It is unlimited and unaffected by all conditions, situations,
circumstances, and events. Love always remains Itself, Its Wholeness undimmed,
encompassing everything in Heaven and on earth.

## The Key to Happiness
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Forgiveness is the key to happiness; this cannot be overstated. Every human
being desires happiness, seeks happiness above all else. The many goals,
pleasures, and attainments sought by the human mind are not actually sought for
their own sake. They but represent a state of mind or being that is highly
valued: happiness. Yet is happiness itself not attained as a secondary result
of goals or accomplishments. A temporary state of what appears to be
“happiness” may accompany certain experiences, but it is not deep or lasting. A
“happiness” that depends on conditions and circumstances, unstable and
constantly changing as are all things of this world, is hardly worth seeking.

Happiness, as an aspect of Truth, is what you are. It does not rest on the
ephemeral conditions of this world or change with the shifting sands of time.
Happiness simply is. When you find the happiness that is a part of you, of your
true nature, you are happy for no reason, and constantly so. Real happiness
will not desert you, but can be driven from your awareness by choosing that
which denies it. When you once attain real happiness, the shabby substitute
offered by the ego will no longer attract you.

If you would be happy in this world, you must be forgiving. Forgiveness is an
expression of Love, and without Love is happiness impossible. You cannot attain
one aspect of Truth while denying Its Wholeness. Its meaning is Its Wholeness,
and while denying Its meaning you will never find happiness. Forgiveness will
lead you back to happiness and Love, as surely as judgement and grievances will
bring fear and sorrow.

Forgiveness is your function here for it leads to the healing of all that is
not Love, and through the healing it brings is the world also healed. When you
are healed, you are not healed alone, for healing is the return to Wholeness,
and the return of one mind to Wholeness includes all minds. The return to
Wholeness is the return to happiness, and the mind that is happy is capable of
real learning. Happiness facilitates the learning process, just as fear
inhibits it. The Holy Spirit wants you to be a happy learner, as His goal is to
return you to your Self.

Forgiveness consistently practiced and given to all without exception,
including yourself, will set you free to return to the Reality of the Kingdom.
You must be freed of illusion, and the core of illusion is fear. Forgiveness
frees you of fear by teaching you its unreality and healing its effects. Where
there is guilt, there is fear. The function of forgiveness is to heal your
belief in guilt, removing it from your mind, thus allowing innocence and
holiness to reclaim it. A forgiven mind is free of guilt entirely, and sees
only innocence everywhere. The innocent are fearless, for what can threaten
innocence or take away its peace? 

Fear found a home in your mind through the belief in guilt and attack. It arose
as a response to the original separation, having been invented at that time.
Fear has darkened your mind ever since, casting its shadow before you as you
have made the long, weary journey though time, looking vainly for something to
take the place of the Home you left behind.

Through forgiveness, through the release of all guilt in the recognition you
cannot attack or be attacked, fear is seen as causeless and meaningless.
Forgiveness leads you to the end of all illusions by demonstrating they have no
effects, and are therefore unreal. It brings you to the recognition of the
world as but a dream, and who would fear the apparent happenings in a dream he
knew he was dreaming?

The mistaking of the dream for reality, and the belief that it can have real
effects on you, is the cause of all your suffering. It is but your dreaming you
fear; yet your dream merely shows you what you want to be true. When you
recognize your role as the dreamer, and change your mind about what you want to
be true, the dream will change accordingly. As you cease to give it the power
to affect you, you will be free.

Whenever you are tempted to attack your brother, remember who it is you are
attacking. Your brother is yourself; he is a part of you. To attack him is to
attack the Reality you both share. You cannot attack Reality in truth, but you
think you can, and thus is your attack a denial of Truth and will banish It
from your awareness. Attack will always lead to the loss of peace of mind, for
each attack reinforces belief in separation, and the fear and guilt that
maintain it. Peace is the absence of the intent to attack, and where peace
rules the mind, is attack impossible. A truly peaceful mind has recognized the
insanity of attack, no matter what the form or apparent justification. 

## When Forgiveness Rules
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Forgiveness recognizes that attack is impossible and has never occurred. What
has never occurred can hardly be a cause for grievance. In truth, you cannot
suffer loss or be affected in any way by anything outside of you. By placing
the cause of what happens to you outside of yourself, you refuse to take
responsibility for it.

To attribute responsibility to the world and what appears in it, and play the
role of victim, is the cause of the helplessness you feel. To be a frail body,
in an uncaring world filled with separate bodies and malignant forces, is
indeed fearful. If that were true, you would have reason indeed to be afraid,
and all your plans and defenses made to deal with the uncertainties of life,
would be well justified.

My brother, your picture of yourself and the world you see is not true! You but
mistake idle dreaming for the Truth. Not one thing you believe about the world
is true, and never has been. There is no world apart from you, for it exists
only in your mind, as does everything. Without your consent and support, the
world would not exist. You are not a separate being, living in a world of many
separate forms and purposes, marked by difference and varied intent. Every
living thing in this world is a part of you, and all share one intent: to
return to the one Truth, the one Unity of which everything is a whole part.

There is no other purpose for this world in truth than the one given it by the
Holy Spirit: To use time, to use the experiences of this world, to learn what
must be learned to meet the conditions of Truth, so that Truth may return to
the mind that lost its way for a little while. Your only purpose here is to
awaken to the Truth of what you are, and thereby help your brothers to likewise
return to the Kingdom.

Your only responsibility, the one that makes return possible, is to accept the
Atonement, the undoing of the false mind, for yourself. All true responsibility
is included therein. To give your mind over to the Holy Spirit for the purpose
of healing all that is not Love, all that is not true, will return your mind to
Love. Love sees all as part of Itself, and offers help to all.

When forgiveness rules the mind, all sense of grievance, all belief in the need
for attack, is renounced, and complete responsibility for all that seems to
happen to you is accepted. When you realize that all happenings and events, all
so-called “attacks,” are just the response to your request, it then becomes
impossible to blame anybody else for anything. In the deep and consistent
learning of this lesson, does all guilt disappear from your mind and from the
world.

The mind free of guilt and sin is a forgiven mind. A forgiven mind naturally
forgives all its brothers and the world, for only the self-accused condemn. The
forgiven see no cause for grievance anywhere, as they see only the innocence of
God’s Creation reflected everywhere in everything. In the freedom of total
forgiveness and Love, is the mind made ready to receive God, as He takes the
final step that restores you to the Kingdom of Unity forever. In that moment is
the world left behind, and the full knowledge of what you are in God, in Truth,
returns to your awareness, transforming it completely.

Creation is incomplete without you; your Father wills that you return to full
awareness of your Oneness with Him. It is not His Will that you be not in full
communication with Him. His Will waits not on time, and so is all separation
over and gone. Yet in your mind does the dream still seem real, and until you
awaken and take your rightful place, Heaven will call to you unceasingly and
you <span class="under">will</span> hear the Call.

Only time stands between where you think you are now and your return, and time
is but illusion. Illusions can seem to stand between you and Truth, and can
resist the Will of God in vain imaginings, but every mind will tire of dreams
eventually and withdraw its belief in illusion. The edifice of separation will
fall away, revealing the Truth it served to conceal but for a moment. You will
rush to meet Truth as It welcomes you, and in that Union will the world of
dreams disappear from your mind, never to return.

## The Only Choice
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Whenever the choice you face is between Truth or illusion, and that is the only
choice you ever face, be aware of what you choose and why. Just as there is
never a choice other than these two, motivation will always take but one of two
forms: a desire for Truth or a wish to continue living in illusion. The
motivation behind your choice will always be rewarded with what it has asked
for.

The desire for Truth needs no clarification as it arises from your higher mind,
your right-mindedness. The wish for illusion however, needs to be seen clearly
for what it is, for the confusion and lack of understanding that surround it,
hide the real consequences of your choices from your awareness. No one, even in
this world, consciously chooses that which leads to pain and suffering. No one
deliberately makes a decision that would make peace of mind and real happiness
unattainable. Yet this is exactly what you ask for every time you choose
illusion over Truth.

Illusion, like Truth, is all of a piece. In dreams it may appear that you are
wishing for something desirable. In time that appears to be so, yet in every
choice for the things of this world, is its opposite included. This is the
world of opposites; you cannot have one without the other, for this is the law
that governs dreaming. Pleasure or pain, success or failure, good or bad,
alternate back and forth in varying ratios, with first one then the other
dominating your experience. With gain comes loss, with pleasure comes pain, and
so it goes throughout your life until it ends in death where all is left
behind. Every choice for illusion, is a choice for all the world of illusions
holds. If you really knew you were constantly choosing death, although that
result may be postponed until some unknown time in the future, you would think
again.

The ego’s intention is to obscure the truth of what your choices offer you
under its guidance, for the ego leads you nowhere but to your death. In the
ego’s eyes it is death, and death only, that is your just reward, for it
regards you as guilty and deserving only of punishment and death. In the fear
and guilt of the original separation was the ego born, and it has sought only
your death ever since. Its core is fear, and the foundation stone of its
thought system is guilt. As long as you identify with the ego you will believe
you are guilty, and through the projection of that guilt you will see a guilty
and sinful world. Fear will follow you every step of the way, and happiness
will not be found.

It is essential that you understand completely and without denial the
inevitable results that follow when you decide for illusion. The willful
ignorance of all this choice entails, enables you to focus only on the
“positive” aspects and drive the rest from your awareness. The Holy Spirit will
help you heal your mind of its confusion and misunderstanding, thus enabling
you to learn the distinction between what is true and what is illusion, between
what will set you free and what will perpetuate your bondage to fear, sorrow,
and suffering. The learning of this all-important lesson provides you with the
understanding from which to make the only choice that can be made.

With every choice you are offered God or the ego, Truth or illusion, Life or
death, Love or fear, freedom or bondage, peace or conflict, joy or sorrow,
healing or suffering, innocence or guilt. These are but different ways to say
the same thing. Always only two choices, and every one you make gives you all
of Truth or all of illusion. And you will rejoice or suffer according to the
decision you make, for by your choice is your life determined.

You are responsible for your life in every detail. Nothing comes to you
uninvited or unsought, and every wish is fulfilled. When you understand and
accept this fact, taking full responsibility for everything that happens in
your life, good or bad, you are on the road to freedom. Freedom is impossible
without responsibility, for who can be free without recognizing the bonds that
hold him prisoner are of his own making? Through this recognition is the way
clear to loose the chains that bind, and in so doing is freedom restored.

The secret of salvation is simply this: I am doing it to myself. This is true
no matter what seems to happen in the dream, for you are the dreamer of the
dream. Forget that you are dreaming, and you seem to be cast adrift in a
hostile and uncaring world, at the mercy of forces beyond your control.
Remember the part you play in making the dream, and you are free of the need to
react and defend and attack. When all projection is laid aside and judgement
relinquished, there is nothing left to do but accept and forgive everyone and
everything, and in that are you free at last.

## The Purpose You Assign
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

What is the story of your life really about? What is actually happening behind
the parade of seeming events that appears to be happening to you and all around
you? What does it all mean, and why do things and people seem to change
constantly, leaving no hope of stability or certainty? This world was made as a
place of chaos where fear reigns and God is absent. This was its purpose, and
is its purpose still if you would have it so.

There is no inherent meaning or purpose in chaos, unless you assign it.
Identified as the ego, you have given the world the purpose of proving
separation from God is real; all your efforts are directed at maintaining this
belief and the experience that arises from it. Included in this purpose is the
ego’s plan for all living things, which is death. Is this what you really want? 

All the good things, the exciting experiences, the world seems to offer but
mask the fact that it is a place of impermanence, where all life ends in death.
For a little while you may pursue various pleasures and seek goals that promise
happiness and fulfillment, but you will not find true happiness here. A world
of chaos and uncertainty, of shifting sands and vanishing hopes, offers only
fleeting amusements and distractions at best. And always at the end of the
journey, death waits, making a mockery of all that has gone before. 

Do not invest your hope where there is none. Do not accept the ego’s purpose
for the world as your own. Do not accept meaninglessness and death as the
context of your life. It is but a choice you made long ago, and forgetting the
role you played in making the world, you have seemed to be its unwilling victim
ever since. It need not be so. Only this choice made so long ago, seems to keep
this picture alive in your mind. You can choose again, and you must, if you
would be free. 

The Holy Spirit has another purpose for the world entirely. He overlooks the
chaos and all the activities of the ego, for He knows that nothing here makes
any sense, and what is meaningless is not real. Yet He recognizes the dream is
real to the dreamer. He takes you where you are and gently leads you on the
path of learning, teaching you what is false and what is true.

The real purpose of the world is to be the place where God’s Son has come for a
little while to remember the Truth of what He is. Then He is gone, to be seen
no more, leaving behind miracles of Love to bless his brothers still in
bondage, as he was blessed. You must accept the Holy Spirit’s purpose for the
world if you would leave it, for you need His help to escape the trap you have
set for yourself.

Surrounded by false ideas of yourself, and believing them real, you cannot find
your way out of your dilemma. Believing that you are what you are not, you
cannot find the Truth. Illusion will never find Truth no matter where it looks.
The mind that thinks itself a body must be gently shown its error, that it may
cease its false identification and learn what it is in Truth. Through emptying
the mind of the false, you make room for Truth, and through the learning
process you undertake with the Holy Spirit’s guidance, you learn to meet the
conditions for Truth’s return. 

Just as soon as you are ready, the Self will take you unto Itself, and all your
problems will vanish. Problems belong to the world of dreams; when Reality has
replaced dreaming, problems fade into nothingness. As the Self, you have no
problems, for problems belong to the world of bodies, and the Self is not a
body. As the Self, you are beyond birth and death, for you are Life Itself,
created by God, and Life is eternal. Never has the Self known death.

When the time is right, everything that needs to happen will happen, if you
allow it. What is necessary, what is truly needed in your life, is always
waiting for your willingness to receive it. Without willingness, nothing can be
given you. At any moment everything can be given, everything that you seem to
lack, if you are sufficiently receptive. But you must be willing to meet the
conditions that make receiving possible.

To receive that which is real is the only possibility. Because you are so busy,
striving for fantasies that exist but in imagination, what is real is not
wanted or recognized. To dedicate your life and mind to illusion is to refuse
Reality Itself, for you can choose only one. While you value illusion, Reality
will escape you, until you tire of chasing phantoms and begin to consider an
alternative. When that time comes is determined by you. The time of readiness
waits only for your decision to let it be now; it is always now that Spirit
waits to meet you, and turn your mind back towards Truth.

The Father and I are One, and in this fact is my salvation assured. God is my
Source. He has created me as I am, and I remain as God created me. This is fact
and remains so, no matter how long I lose myself in dreams or what seems to
happen in the dream.

Illusions cannot affect Reality in any way but they can take Its place in your
awareness, if this be your choice. When illusions are preferred over Truth,
does the Truth become fearful to the mind lost in dreams, and so is It twice
denied. This fear must be undone, its grip on your mind loosened, before Truth
can return. Whatever you may think about Truth, is false, for It cannot be
understood while you remain in ignorance.

All ignorance of Truth is willful ignorance, for nothing outside of you can
make you lose the knowledge of what you are. A choice, a hasty decision made in
fear a long time ago to be what you are not, has deprived you of the awareness
of your Creator and your Self. That choice has faded from memory, and you have
been lost so long in dreams that it is illusion that seems real, and Reality
but imagination. A body is your chosen home; its senses are the witnesses you
trust to prove the world real.

The body’s senses are the means the ego has chosen to secure your allegiance to
its thought system of separation. And certain it is the senses will show you a
picture of many different forms, each separate and complete in itself. Each
form has a separate life and circumstances, and no meaningful relationship with
any other, unless it be a special one constructed in isolation and exclusion.

The “special” love relationship is the ego’s chosen substitute for the
relationship with God. Your relationship with your Creator is the only
relationship. All others are a part of that, if they be true. A relationship
built on love that excludes, on fulfillment of needs ascribed by the ego, is
not an expression of Love, nor will you find real fulfillment there. Only in
your relationship with your Heavenly Father, will you find the true fulfillment
and completion you desire and need. Through your Oneness with Him are you
joined as One with all Creation. In this Unity is all the Love there is or ever
will be.

## You Know Nothing
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

When the need for Truth, the recognition of the only need you have, begins to
dawn on your mind, you will be moved to turn in Its direction. Until this
happens, you will be moving away from Truth, for these are the only two
directions possible in this world. The many roads the world seems to offer you,
however different they may appear, all lead but in one direction. And death
waits at the end of them all, returning your body to the dust from which it
came.

Whatever you do or think, will bring you closer to Truth or lead you away from
It. It cannot be otherwise, for the mind is choosing Truth or illusion with
everything it does. Even though you are not aware of the consequences of your
thoughts and actions, you will still receive the result, for the law that
governs choosing cannot be evaded. This is why it is so important to be aware
of what you are deciding for, as each choice is both a decision for one, and a
decision against the other. Intelligent choosing requires that you be aware of
the inevitable and inescapable result of each choice. What you choose is what
you get, whether the choice be conscious or unconscious, and its consequences
recognized or unrecognized.

The mind of separation believes it can make partial choices, that it can choose
one illusion and not others. It believes pleasure can be sought and pain
avoided, that guilt can be seen in one and not another. It can attack and not
be affected. My brother, this is not so. Illusion is one, despite its appearing
in many guises. To choose even one illusion you would have be real, is to be
subject to all. To seek pleasure is to ask for pain. See a brother as guilty,
and you stand condemned alongside him. Attack your brother, and you will not
escape the effects of your intent to harm. Illusion must be rejected entirely
if you would know Truth.

Let go all ideas of what you should do or how you should be. You know nothing.
The recognition of this fact prepares the way for the return of wisdom. Wisdom
consists of knowing the difference between Truth and illusion, between Reality
and dreams. Wisdom will always recognize and choose Truth, for it knows only
what is true and rejects all falsity.

To attain wisdom, the mind must reach a state of clarity and emptiness. This
requires a fundamental undoing of all worldly thoughts, of all belief in and
attachment to the things of this world and to the world itself. Desire must be
purified, and all meaningless and conflicting desires replaced with a single
desire: the desire for God, the desire for Truth. Truth has never left your
mind, for It abides in the part of your mind that resides in Wholeness, in
eternal Unity. However, you have lost the awareness of Truth, replacing It with
a dream of separation.

Wisdom is not of the ego. It arises not from the belief in separation nor does
it recognize fear. It looks past fear entirely, knowing it as false, an
invention of a mind that lost its way for a little while. Wisdom rests on
Truth, being the recognition only Truth is true, and what is not true is false.
There is nothing illuminated understanding cannot do, for the power of Truth is
in it.

What is the price of wisdom, of real understanding? The giving up of all
illusion, of all fear, pain, suffering, and loss, is the condition required.
When Love rules your heart and wisdom directs your mind, you are free of this
world and all its misery and empty promises. Love is ever free, and wisdom
protects this freedom through right understanding of Love’s nature. When Love
is what you want and nothing else, Its all encompassing nature will take you
unto Itself, and you will return to your Father. Through Oneness with God and
all of Creation, you are forever safe and free.

## The Acceptance of Truth
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Nothing can liberate your mind but your own decision to be free. This is the
necessary condition for freedom to be given you. The decision to be a bodily
identity is the decision to be limited in time and space, separate from all,
and subject to death. Clearly, this is the opposite of freedom. A body can
never be free, for it is itself the denial of freedom and the symbol of
limitation. True freedom is freedom from all limits, and this is possible only
for Mind.

Mind Itself is formless, all pervading, unconditional, unlimited, and cannot be
bound in any way. As Mind, the Christ Mind, you are freedom itself, as
incapable of being limited as your Creator. Only your identification with the
ego and its chosen home, the body, can deny you the Truth of what you are. This
denial is but a dream, for you cannot change what God created as perfect and
unbound. Yet can you dream that you have done so, and through your belief is
the power given to the illusions you have made to affect you and thus “prove”
their reality.

When you tire of this play of shadows, of the suffering and loss that represent
it, the willingness will arise in your mind to look elsewhere, to seek to be
free and happy again. The Holy Spirit responds to the least inclination towards
Truth, and will give you as much help as you are open to receive. More than
this He cannot give, for the pace at which your awakening proceeds is
determined by you. You chose to lose yourself in dreams, to maintain the dream,
to defend it from the intrusion of Truth. And it is your choice to turn again
towards Truth, to meet the conditions for Its return, and to welcome Truth back
into your mind.

Whenever the Truth is revealed to you, you must first accept It. Without
acceptance, there is no recognition. To accept Truth is to be an open mind,
calm and receptive, empty of preconceptions and old ideas. Abiding in the
present, with past and future forgotten, the mind becomes tranquil and empty.
Such a mind is open to the new and unexpected.

Truth cannot be captured by thought; thought can at best point in Its direction
or represent It, but Reality Itself is beyond the reach of conceptual mind.
Truth is always new yet eternally unchanging, always unexpected yet completely
familiar. Truth cannot be captured by the mind or limited in any way. Only the
mind that is empty and deep can be absorbed by Truth, for it has fulfilled the
necessary conditions. Truth will come of Itself when you are ready to receive
It; It waits only on your invitation, for only your unwillingness has driven It
from your awareness.

Your mind is part of Truth and cannot lose what it is in essence. Yet you can,
and have, attempted to reject what you are, substituting illusion in its place.
In truth this cannot be, but in dreams can you believe you are something else,
and through this belief does Truth vanish from your awareness. Yet is your
Reality held safe for you by the Holy Spirit, Who waits only for the moment He
can restore your mind to Truth. When that day comes you will rejoice, and all
of Heaven will join in celebrating the return of God’s Holy Son.

## Fear
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Fear is the great crippler; it acts to literally cripple the mind of God’s Son
and prevents Him from flying. The flight of a bird is nothing compared to the
soaring freedom of the mind that knows God. This freedom was lost to you long
ago, and you have become accustomed to your earth-bound state. To trudge
wearily along, weighed down by troubles and cares, seems to be your natural
condition for this is all you know.

Fear in all its forms makes your mind so heavy it has forgotten how to fly.
Nothing can stop you from being what you are but your decision to be what you
are not. A body, a thing apart, cannot fly, for it was made to tether the mind
to illusion and eclipse its freedom. The mind that believes it is a body, has
voluntarily given up its freedom. The flight of the Soul is unstoppable, but
you can elect to erase Its memory from your mind.

Freedom is impossible when the mind is ruled by fear. Fear reduces the mind to
a frightened thing, huddling behind its defenses, thick walls erected to keep
the world at bay. Fear is the great enemy, the only enemy, if enemy there be.
Its only purpose is to keep the mind in chains, prisoner to its belief in
separation, threat, and attack. Without fear there is no imprisonment, for
without fear there is only Love. Love is the great liberator from the belief in
fear, for in Its Presence, fear cannot remain. Like all illusions, fear is
simply the darkness where Light is absent. When the Light of Love illuminates
the darkness, it disappears, for it has no reality in its own right.

When fear dominates the mind, happiness cannot be found. The many worldly
pursuits by which you seek to attain happiness are doomed to fail, for the
motive that drives the seeking is escape from fear. The state of happiness is
not an escape from fear, it is the healing of fear. Happiness is simply the
natural condition of your mind. You cannot find it through seeking and
goal-oriented activity. To be truly happy is to be happy for no reason.

Fear is the characteristic of the ego, the belief in separation. To the ego,
the world is a threatening place where every hand is raised against it and
attack is imminent. The ego’s strategy is to attack first, and this is done in
various ways. Because you attack, you will believe that vengeance will hunt you
down, and never will you be free of fear. Never will you feel safe if you
identify with the ego, for safety is not found through attack, and defenses are
but an admission of weakness and vulnerability that reinforce the fear that
underlies them.

Only your fear weakens you and makes you vulnerable to attack, for fear is the
result of belief in the reality of separation, and a part of this belief is the
identification with a body. Only bodies can attack and be attacked; to believe
yourself to be a body is to invite weakness and limitation. To be weak is to be
vulnerable, and you will not escape fear and its consequences, nor will you
relinquish the belief in attack and defense.

Fear is present in your mind in many forms, some of which you may not
recognize. It is very important for you to become very aware of the fear in
your mind and its effect on your thinking. Too often is fear the motivation
behind thought and action. The various egoic defense mechanisms, of which there
are many, are all expressions of fear in action.

Without fear, there is no need to attack or defend. Without fear, are all
defenses seen as meaningless and cast aside. Freedom is freedom from fear, for
the only limitations imposed on freedom arise from fear. When all fear in your
mind is healed, when all fearful thoughts have been brought to awareness and
corrected, only Love will remain. And the flowering of this Love is freedom.

When Love is all you know, your life will be transformed and you will live in
the Light of Heaven, though your feet still walk the earth. Your function is to
be Love, to bring Love to this loveless place. The world was made to be a place
where Love could not enter but in reduced or distorted form. Fear was invented
to take Love’s place as motivator, while pain and suffering replaced happiness.
Happiness then became something that must be sought, found, earned, and is seen
as the result of certain conditions, attainments, or achievements. As all
circumstances of this life are fundamentally unstable and subject to constant
change, lasting happiness is impossible here, and the mind must keep itself
constantly busy to hide this fact. 

