---
ref: "21"
title: "The Flight of Freedom"
subtitle: "A message from the Voice of Christ through a Choir of Angels in the presence of Archangel Raphael and Archangel Gabriel"
---

## I. Prelude

Beloved soul in love! Once again we are present, being at the same time a
multitude and a unity at all times and in all places, with you and with
everything. We thank you for opening your hearts to the flow of divine union,
and for the generosity of giving freely what you have freely received. These
words will be a balm for hearts thirsting for peace, rest, and love. They will
be ointment for wounds. They will be a song of praise for souls that yearn to
return to the awareness of their indescribable beauty. They will be a source of
joy. They will be a song of hope that does not disappoint. They will be a
blessing for many and a joy for God.

Sons and daughters of purity, if you were able to know the joy of our hearts to
be at your side and in you, you would cry with happiness. The Mother of God and
the whole of Heaven extend to you in this holy hour of union, truth, and
holiness. A multitude of spiritual lights radiating divine beauty surround
you everywhere, and not only to you who receive these words at this moment, but
to each and every one of your sisters and brothers and every aspect of
creation. Each of you has an angel by your side—not just one, but several. A
myriad of seraphs surround the Earth at this time in history. They are the
custodians of the Second Coming. They are your guides in the light of the
Christ. They watch over you.

If you close your eyes and remain in the peace of Christ, resting in the
presence of love, you will hear trumpets of joy that the cherubs of God intone,
announcing the coming of Christ. And you can also see the same living Christ
coming to meet you. This is the time of the union of the divine and the human.
It is a time of the union of Christ with your human nature to a degree never
before on Earth. It is time to move into a new state of consciousness: full
awareness that the Christ of God has descended from the Heavens in response to
your call and has merged with your soul. Now you are joined. You are the living
Christ who lives in you.

Redeemed humanity, feel the beating of the wings of your angels of God, those
that have been given to you as an invaluable gift of the incomparable love of
the Creator. Speak to your angels. They await you always. They are at your door
and are knocking. If you make a peaceful space for them in your minds and
hearts, they will enter and prepare a feast of love. Remember that wherever
they enter, the Mother of love enters as well. And where she is, there, always,
is Christ. In union with the holy, the beautiful, and the perfect, in union
with ineffable love, the angels escort you to the Heavenly banquet where your
soul delights in the love that God is. Delight and joy is experienced in the
silence of your heart, in an ecstasy of love and contemplation.

## II. You Are Free

Beloved of God, let your soul be in the rapture of love. Surrender to God.
Release all ties. Leave behind all defenses. Abandon yourself completely to the
merciful love of the Father. Those ties that once oppressed you no longer
exist. Now is the time of freedom, the time of the Second Coming, a time of joy
for you who receive these words and for all who wholeheartedly desire peace.

Daughters and sons of light, do not deny anyone the invitation to the banquet
of life. Let everyone sit at the table of love. You are living in the time of
freedom. You are free. Sing along with the creation of a new song, the song of
freedom. Nothing will be able to oppress you any more unless you so choose. And
you will not choose it for long, for you desire freedom as a child of God. What
was previously impossible for humans is no longer so. Material creation, and
with it human nature, is not the same since the resurrection and the assumption
of the glorious body of the Mother of Christ. Everything changed from that
moment on in this three-dimensional plane of space, time, and matter. Remember
this often.

Today we have come to propose a simple path on which to walk together, a short
path that will allow you to free yourself from the last tiny bonds that remain
in your minds. In truth they are not real attachments, but rather they are
something like habits that act as chains. They are customs that no longer fit
with the truth of the freedom in which you live.

There is an analogy in your world that will illustrate this. In certain cases,
for the domestication of animals, the tamer places a chain around the neck of
the animal and attaches the chain to a stake, a wall, or a strong post. The
animal cannot move beyond the chain’s length. In this brutal form of
domestication, the chain may be attached to the animal for several years,
usually from a very young age. Then the chain is released from where it was
attached, but not from around the neck. The animal, despite being “free,” still
feels the chain on its neck and considers it to be secured, so it continues to
not move beyond the length of the chain.

So is it with your mind: Many years of captivity have consequences for your
mental and emotional habits, a submission to laws other than the law of love
which is only freedom. Submission to human laws, the laws of survival, have
led you to greater captivity than even those subdued animals. Such habits and
limiting memories will be gone forever. We will let them go all at once through
this short path that we have come to propose, a simple path that may cost you a
little at first, but that difficulty will not last long.

Here you have a safe path to the experience of true freedom. And once you
experience freedom you will become aware of truth that is not of this world.
Truth will set you free just as freedom will bring you truth. You will become
fully aware that love, truth, and freedom are truly one and the same. They are
what you really are—a being of love, a real being, an eternally free being.

## III. The Decision To Be Free

Beloveds of God, give yourselves freedom. There never was, nor ever will be,
anything or anyone that can snatch it from you, just as nothing can take love
away. In your will to decide lies the door to the experience of full freedom.
Towards that door and beyond we now go. Here we find the way to open it. We see
new horizons and walk beyond that to which we are accustomed. And we ascend
into the unfathomable heights of freedom without limit.

To launch the flight of freedom, first rid yourself of the chain around your
neck. Feel the tension in your shoulders. Feel the tension of your body and the
restlessness of your soul. Become aware of the fear of freedom. We assure you:
The fear of freedom is the basis of all fear, and the foundation of the entire
physical universe. The tension you feel as you read these words or as you sit
quietly and become aware of the unlimited magnitude of your being, of the
immensity of life that you are, is due to the deep feeling of slavery that you
have felt throughout the history of humanity from the beginning of time and
even before the beginning of time. That chain that seems to enslave you has its
foundation in the desire to possess, in the desire to hoard. Today you will be
freed forever from that desire. Through the grace of that liberation you will
begin to soar in the majestic flight of the soul, the flight of freedom.

The desire to possess is that which binds you to the past, to the Earth, and
also to hell. It is what prevents you from taking flight. You cannot fly with
such weight on your shoulders. Children of light, until now you have walked a
long and winding path. Sometimes the road was safe and easy, and even full of
beauty. Other times you have traveled steep and difficult parts. You have left
behind many “belongings” which were actually trifles that you accumulated from
your desire to possess. You traveled like a nomad wandering in the desert,
carrying your belongings, habitually moving, because that was your experience
of freedom in the absence of a place to call home. Thus you wandered from place
to place, neither here nor there. Such was the price you paid for that
“freedom.” Others ventured not into the unknown; they made their living staked
in one place, a refuge where nothing changed. They called it their security.

We come from Heaven and invite you to decamp, to live life right now in the
opposite way. And we assure you that you will get an opposite result.
Abandoning what made you a slave will begin to bring freedom. Divest yourself
of the desire for, and the attachment to, everything. Do not want to own
anything. Give everything to everyone, always. In that way, without wanting to
retain anything, neither material nor spiritual, you will live like the free
being that you are in truth.

Live from now and forever in the key place of giving, not accumulating, not
hoarding. Do not worry about how to do this. The universe will conspire in your
favor and show you opportunities to give from the abundance of your heart if
you wish. Thus you can experience freedom in the absence of need. And from that
absence of need you will recognize that wealth is not with the one who has more
but the one who needs less. We invite you to live in the consciousness of
abundance, which means to live in the consciousness of the complete absence of
need. The perception of deficiency is what has led humanity to accumulate under
the false hope that accumulating, whether of physical things or otherwise—such
as fame, prestige, or being right—can fill the void of being, the emptiness of
love, which is the source of all deficiency.

## IV. Love Fills Everything

Beloveds in the light of Christ, love fills all lack. Love satisfies all
needs. Love takes care of everything, even in the physical world. Did you
really believe that you could ever create a world in which God is not? Did you
ever believe that you were alone? Did you really believe that you could ever
hide from love? Rejoice in this truth: Your Father and Creator, who is also
ours, foresees all the needs of your minds, your hearts, your souls, and your
physical and emotional bodies to a degree far greater than you could
anticipate.

Your heart cannot beat without there being an echo in the Heart of God. You
never need ask for anything because He always knows ahead of time. You are
never helpless. You cannot be. Helplessness is a state of the ego, for the ego
is the substitute for the self. Getting rid of being, or self, was what led to
the experience of looking for a mechanism to fill that void, trying to be
more than what it was. You have no idea how the deprivation of happiness causes
your desire to possess. If only for a moment you could renounce that desire,
you would remember the divine memory of freedom as a child of God.

The desire to possess led to the condensation of consciousness because the
desire to possess is unnatural to being. There is no such thing as possession
in the realm of love. Love does not possess. Love gives. Condensation of
consciousness is what this physical universe is. Simply put, the body is a part
of consciousness that has been condensed in such a way that a part of being
separated from the totality of being, condensed, and was trapped inside the
form of the body as a bundle of fearful thoughts. This is why the body is
always afraid. Once consciousness is condensed into a bundle of fearful
thoughts, which are themselves in the physical body and all matter, then
those thoughts, which are actually a single totally fearful thought, the
thought of separation, is trapped, imprisoned.

This is the source of the oppression of your will, your desires. Everyone feels
hindered in their feelings. You all feel the oppression of limits that the
body and mind impose. Such limitations cause you to live in a limited fashion.
Again, it is the desire to possess that limits you. Renounce it and you will
see the Heavens open wide. Give up the desire to possess and you will cease to
walk on the path of life and begin to fly through the firmament of love, the
majestic flight of freedom.

Daughters and sons of God, to the extent that you possess or wish to possess,
to that extent you obstruct your freedom. To the extent that you release
everything—and when we say everything, we mean everything—to that extent you
will be free. You and only you determine the degree of your freedom. But do not
try to fly alone. The flight of spirit is undertaken in unity, that is, in God.
Surrender yourself completely into the arms of love. Surrender to God, and let
Christ teach you to fly the majestic flight of freedom. Simply say with all
your heart, if necessary every day:

*“Eternal Father, I trust immensely in Your mercy. I know that You are watching
over me. I know that I need not worry about anything, nor procure anything. I
give You control of my life, of my desire to possess, and of my whole self. I
do not want to possess even my soul. I do not belong to myself. I am only
Yours. Your will and nothing but Your will be done in me. Heavenly Father, You
who gave me life and sustains my existence, allow me to abandon everything in
You, and to rest eternally like a newborn child in Your arms, in the arms of
love. Amen.”*

