---
ref: "Chapter Nine"
title: "The Way Back"
---

All that must be done to return to Heaven is to reverse the original error when
Love was replaced by fear, Oneness by separation, and Eternity eclipsed by
time. The reversal begins with the recognition of the original error and the
desire to let it be corrected. Struggle and effort are not needed, although
they may be a part of the process in the early stages. It is not necessary for
you to correct the original error, indeed you cannot. The Holy Spirit has the
function of undoing the falsity in your mind, with your willingness and
cooperation. He alone has the vision, the understanding, and the power to do
so. Although He does it for you, He can do nothing without you fulfilling your
part.

Your part is simple and straightforward and never changes. You are asked and
required to learn the difference between Truth and illusion, Love and fear; and
to apply this understanding consistently to your own thoughts, feelings, and
actions, choosing Truth over falsity, thus withdrawing the investment in
illusion. This is an active process that goes on constantly as mind is
ceaselessly active. The Holy Spirit will help you in this, giving you His
willingness to strengthen yours. What is required is an undoing, not a doing,
as the false thought system of separation is steadily and skillfully undone,
until all falsity in the mind is healed leaving only the willingness for Truth.

When the mind has been made ready to welcome Love, the great reversal returns
your mind to sanity, and Heaven is restored. Then nothing remains to be done
but to thank your Father. Until then however, the work must go on ceaselessly
from morning to night. The Holy Spirit stands ever ready to assist you in all
ways; it is in letting yourself be guided in all things, in making no decisions
by yourself, that your mind and perception are corrected, and you are set free
to return to the Kingdom. Thus your one responsibility is to accept the
Atonement, the undoing, for yourself. In meeting this one condition is
everything included and salvation made certain.

## The Awareness of Fear
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Fear is ever present in this world; it casts its dark shadow across every
moment of your life, the good times and the bad. Its baleful influence assures
that no good times last, no lasting happiness and contentment can be found.
Fear remains your invisible companion, your uninvited guest, for it is the core
of the ego and makes up the very foundation of the thought system of
separation. Fear goes hand in hand with guilt; where one is found, there will
the other be also. 

Despite its great influence and constant presence, fear often goes
unrecognized, for it seems to take many forms. It drives behavior although it
is often masked by the superficial motivation. The human mind must dissociate
itself from the fear and guilt pervading it, in order to function and to have
even the few happy moments it seems to find. To be fully aware of the fear that
darkens your mind would be too painful to bear. 

Yet must you become aware of fear, its movements and all the forms it may take,
if you are to heal your mind and return it to Wholeness. Fear and guilt are the
great obstacles to Truth and Love. What is in your mind must be brought to
awareness, that you may choose again and let it go. The Holy Spirit cannot
remove it unless you choose along with Him. You cannot choose Truth over
falsity unless what is chosen against is brought to awareness. That of which
you are unaware, remains in effect until you choose differently, for it acts to
distort your mind and limit your freedom. Spiritual purification is the
uncovering of all fear and guilt; all the dark corners of your mind must be
brought to Light that the darkness may be dispelled. All that is not Love must
be healed to prepare the way for Love’s return. 

Fear takes many forms that are unrecognized. Anger, rage, hate, sadness,
depression, anxiety, grief, all are simply fear in another form. All emotions
not a part of Love, are part of fear, for Love and fear are the only emotions
and but one of them is real. This consistent possibility, always a choice
between two alternatives, no matter how it appears, makes choosing simple.
Whatever presents itself to you, whatever the circumstances, there are still
only two possible choices. You always choose between Truth and illusion,
between Love and fear, and in the decision for Truth is illusion corrected and
your mind set free. 

Whatever the outcome of your choices, you are responsible. To choose, to
decide, is to take responsibility; and this is true whether choice be made
carelessly or without conscious awareness. Your responsibility for what happens
to you is total, and this will never change. To refuse to recognize this fact,
to project blame onto the world, is to perpetuate bondage. By taking total
responsibility does salvation become possible. 

Fear is the domain of the ego whose core is fear. The ego believes in fear as
reality; its thought system and behavior are based on and arise from fear, as
fear. Fear is the expression of the ego in action; and through fear it attempts
to protect its chosen home, the body. Only hate could perceive a world as the
ego does, for the ego sees cause for fear everywhere, and what is feared is
also hated. Hate has thus arisen from fear, as a form of fear. Unless you
identify with the ego, you cannot hate. To identify with the ego is to identify
with the body; to be a body is to perceive yourself under constant threat.
Under such circumstances, it is impossible that the mind be not dominated by
fear, and hate cannot be far behind.

## The Secret of Salvation
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

The Holy Spirit responds to this perception of fear by gently teaching you it
is not true. Surely if you are a body, does the ego’s view of the world and its
responses make perfect sense. Be glad that all illusion is still illusion, no
matter how threatening the form it takes. In this fact is your salvation. 

Illusions need not be resisted, struggled with, or defended against. They pose
no threat at all for they do not exist. This fact must be clearly recognized
and accepted if you are to be free of their effects, which you have given them
through the power of your belief. The Holy Spirit will teach you step by step
how to recognize illusion and how to respond to it. He will show you, if you
let Him, that you are in no danger and under no threat that does not emanate
from your own mind. 

The secret of salvation lies in this recognition: It is all a dream, my dream,
and I am doing it to myself. No matter what happens is this still true. From
the clear understanding and acceptance of this fact, salvation arises and sets
you free. Under all the conditions and circumstances of your life, in
everything you experience, remember this and you will know how to respond; and
the world will bind and threaten you no more. 

The Holy Spirit will guide you through the maze that is this world and the
belief in it. His lessons will gently undo your false beliefs and the resultant
fear, leaving you in a state of gratitude and peace. You must want to learn
what He teaches however, and you must be willing to give up all your past
beliefs and everything you think you know. 

The process of Atonement must undo the belief system of separation and all that
it entails. Unless this is done, you remain a prisoner to the past, to all the
habitual tendencies that dominate your thinking. If you would remain as God
created you, if you would experience yourself as That, you must relinquish the
self you have made to take the place of what God created as you. One or the
other must prevail in your experience of yourself, but never both. The purpose
of the Atonement and the Holy Spirit, Who is the Mind of the Atonement, is to
undo or correct the mind of separation in every way, leaving a clean and
sparkling place to which the Truth can return. 

Your single responsibility is to accept this process of undoing, of correcting
your mind, and to cooperate fully with the Holy Spirit until your mind is
purified of all falsity. You need not worry about how this will be done, for He
alone knows the way. You do not have the understanding or the vision to find
your way out of the imprisonment that is the ego mind. To attempt to add your
ideas to what the Holy Spirit teaches you, or to try and do it on your own, is
to obstruct and delay the process. Trying to do it your way is actually a
veiled attempt to maintain control, to maintain egoic identification, and is
thus an expression of resistance. Resistance arises from fear; it is always
associated with the ego and never helpful. 

Surrender is essential and is accomplished most simply by making no decisions
by yourself, by turning over decision making to the One Who knows what is best
in every situation and circumstance, the Holy Spirit. You will learn, as you
turn the power of decision over to Him more and more, that your faith is richly
rewarded by the results you will achieve.

A state of mind that is happy, peaceful, and joyful will become your natural
and constant condition; all apparent problems will be solved and nothing that
you need will be lacking. All apparent obstacles that seem to block your way
will be removed, and all tasks assigned to you will be successfully completed,
if you allow the Holy Spirit to guide you in all things.

## Awareness and the Self
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Awareness is what you are. Mind is what you are, what you have been, and what
you will always be. This fact is not open to doubt or question, and yet you
doubt and question. You believe you are a body rather than mind, and think your
mind is somehow a part of your body. Nothing could be further from the truth,
for the body is a temporary learning device, nothing more. This is how the Holy
Spirit sees it, so this is the only meaning, the only purpose, the only
usefulness the body has.

To the ego, the body is its chosen home; its purpose is to prove separation
real, death a fact, and enable illusion to take the place of Reality. The body
is used to make attack real, to limit and imprison the mind, and to subject the
mind to pain, sickness, and suffering of all kinds. If you identify with the
ego, this will be the “reality” you experience, not because it is true but
because you have chosen it.

The body is wholly neutral in itself. It does only what you have assigned it to
do. If you give the body the purpose to limit and imprison your mind, it will
do so, but only because that is your wish. If the body be your chosen home,
fear will rule your life, and sickness, pain, and suffering will accompany you
all your days. The ego does not want you to realize these facts. It hides them
from you, holding out the promise of pleasure, of stimulation of all kinds, and
offering a wide variety of goals you can attain, all of which have the purpose
of keeping you busy and distracted so you do not realize the condition you are
in.

Is this what you want? You have come far enough by now to begin to see the
actual circumstances of your life as a body, as an egoic identity, and you are
becoming aware that it is your choice. If what you experience is your choice,
and you do not like it, you can choose again. And choose again you must, if you
would know your Reality and be free of suffering and limitation.

By now you know there is an alternative, or you are at least aware of the
possibility, and it is the opposite in every way from what you presently
experience. You can exchange Truth for illusion, Love for fear, joy for pain,
happiness for sadness and sorrow. You can be free of self-imposed limitations
and know your Self as the Christ, the One Creation of God, the Oneness of All
that lives. There is but one requirement for all this: You must sincerely want
to know your Self again, and be willing to devote yourself to the Atonement
process, that your mind be freed of all illusion and self hate, becoming a pure
and empty vessel into which Truth can return.

The Self is Mind, Spirit or Being, and Light. It is formless and all inclusive.
There is one Self for All that lives, and in It are all joined as One. You have
always been the Self, always will be the Self, and even now are nothing other
than the One Self, the Christ, God’s One Creation. Your willful ignorance of
this fact does not affect the Self at all, but it does drive It from your
awareness. In your awareness, empty of the knowledge of what it is, an image of
yourself has been constructed to take the place of Truth.

The loss of the awareness of your Self and your Creator is a wound so deep that
nothing in this world could ever heal or assuage the profound sense of sadness,
of inconsolable grief, that fills your heart. Yet this feeling too has been
erased from awareness, though it has not left your mind. All the pursuits of
this world, the frantic activities and pleasures, are but the attempt to fill
or cover over the deep sense of emptiness that lies at the root of your mind.

You long for your Father and your Self so deeply, that nothing can ever satisfy
you but Their return to your awareness. The Holy Spirit holds this link, this
memory, for you until your mind is made ready, then He returns it to your
awareness. On that day you will rejoice, and Heaven and all Creation will join
you in celebrating the return of God’s Holy Son. 

