---
ref: "Chapter Ten"
title: "The Return of Wholeness"
---

Always have you missed your Father, always have you longed to return to your
true Home. This world will never satisfy you, it will never heal your wounded
heart, for never will it be your home. You may build palaces; surround yourself
with all possible pleasures, delights, and entertainments; seek comfort in the
company of many other bodies; yet never will you be fulfilled. Shiny baubles,
trivial pursuits, and meaningless goals, cannot conceal the emptiness and
meaninglessness of worldly life.

You will never be happy here as king or beggar. The many different forms life
seems to take merely conceal the emptiness that lies behind them all. No matter
how glorious, all will end in death. The high and mighty, and the lowly, are
all destined to return to the dust from which the body came. All hopes and
dreams will grow dim in time, and the achievements of a lifetime are as nothing
when that life ends in death. 

You are not at home in this world. It is a place you came to for a little
while, a place you can leave again when you so desire, when the longing to
return Home rises to awareness and becomes the only thing you truly want. If
you accept the Holy Spirit’s purpose for the world, it will in time become a
happy place where the Truth of Heaven is reflected, and Love and forgiveness
are extended to all. The beauty of Truth will shine forth, the Light will shine
in every living thing, and you will see everyone as brother to you.

The world you see is but a dream, yet it can be a happy dream, showing forth
the reflection of Truth. Here you will linger but for a little while, no longer
a prisoner, while the Wholeness of your mind is restored. The Holy Spirit will
give you this happy dream when you accept His purpose for the world you see.

Forgiveness is the world’s only purpose; here God’s Son can learn to forgive
his brother and himself, thus healing the world of all sin and guilt. When the
mind that made the world as proof of separation, as symbol of fear, sin, and
guilt, has allowed itself to be healed, its perception returned to Wholeness,
will the world then be transformed into a happy place where all are loved and
forgiven and no one is feared or condemned. 

## The Bridge to Wholeness
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Only through the exercise of willingness, in a consistent manner, is the past
undone. The past is constantly running through your mind; your past thoughts
determine how you see and react in the present. The present is not a blank
slate; it is covered over by past beliefs and habits, and further distorted by
mental projections and interpretations that have their origin in the past. If
you could see the present without the coloring and influence of the past, you
would be able to respond in a manner that is completely new.

The present is where time and Eternity intersect, for it is the only moment in
time that is real. The present is the only moment in time in which you can be
real and thus directly experience your own Reality. The constant intrusion of
the past effectively obscures Reality, making it impossible for you to see
anything but the past. The only thing you can say about the past that is true,
is that it’s over. The past is over and gone, yet seems to live still in your
mind because you hold it in memory and use it to cover over the present. 

The ego’s strategy is to keep the past alive and cover the present, thereby
assuring a future that simply perpetuates the past. It does this out of a sense
of self-preservation, for in the present it does not exist. The ego is an
invention of the past, of the moment of separation, and like everything that
happened during that brief moment of time, it is over and gone. Yet the mind of
separation has not let that moment go, and by holding it in memory and
re-experiencing it as if it were now, the past seems still to be present, to be
seen and experienced. Through the projection of the past onto the now, is the
present covered up and kept from awareness.

Time itself is not sequential but is experienced as such, through the order you
impose on it in your mind. Past seems to lead to present and present turns into
future. All a dream, just a dream. The past is no more, the future has already
happened, only the present is real. Your mind must be freed from its dreamlike
association with time, that the present be available to you. To heal the mind
of its belief in the past, its reliance on it, will restore you to the present
and make possible Reality’s return.

Whenever you decide to let go of the past, to give up all thought of the future
and to be present only, you are free of fear, free to learn, free to love
without conditions. In these moments do you feel a touch of Heaven, and each
time is Heaven brought a little closer.

The Holy Spirit knows time is an illusion; He gives it His purpose that it may
be used to bring you to the end of time, where time is no more and you are free
to return to Eternity. You have no real need of time, yet while you find
yourself in this world, you must use it well. Time can be used to free as well
as to imprison. To use time well is to not waste it pursuing dreams of
happiness or worldly goals. The Holy Spirit will help you use time wisely, that
your journey may be shortened. There is no need to linger in a world of shadows
and vain illusions that is not your home.

Through the Atonement, the Holy Spirit will collapse time in exact proportion
to your learning. Each miracle of Love you offer, each act of true forgiveness,
enables Him to bring you closer and closer to the end of time and your return
to Heaven. There is no other place to go but back to the Home you never left in
truth. Yet It has been erased from your awareness, replaced by a world that can
be perceived, and through perception made real in your experience. With the end
of time comes the end of perception; nothing will remain to cloud your Holy
Mind, and once again Truth will be all you know. 

## Forgiveness Is Your Function
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Forgiveness is your true function here. It is both the way in which separation
is healed and the greatest gift you can give your brothers. To forgive your
brother is to see his innocence, his true identity as the Son of God; to see
this is to offer Him that gift, and what is offered in Love is always received.
The Holy Spirit in your brother’s mind will receive your gift of Love, and hold
it for him until the time comes when he is ready to accept it. Forgiveness
offers you both the Truth of your very Being.

Forgiveness is a miracle of Love, and like all miracles, blesses the giver and
receiver equally. Through the forgiveness of your brother, you come to know and
accept that you are forgiven. When once you realize through forgiveness that
you are not guilty but completely innocent, you will naturally extend this
recognition to all. It is the privilege of the forgiven to forgive. The truly
forgiven see a world where all are loved and forgiven.

Forgiveness is based on Truth, only Truth; it sees truly for it overlooks all
falsity, all sins that were never accomplished but in dreams. It does not take
seriously what happens in dreams for it knows the difference between Truth and
illusion, and never confuses the two. Forgiveness arises from Love and
expresses only Love. It reflects the Wholeness of Love as Love exists in
Heaven; and Heaven is brought a little closer through every act of forgiveness.
Only those who have learned to forgive can be truly loving, for only they have
accepted Love as It is. Through forgiveness you are made whole, and your mind
is restored to the Kingdom.

Through forgiveness is the corner stone of the ego’s thought system of
separation uncovered and undone. The world which arose from the belief in
separation is based on judgement and the perception of sin and guilt. Without
judgement, there is no sin and guilt. When the belief in and the attraction to
sin and guilt are undone, judgement will also disappear. The mind committed to
the practice of true forgiveness does not judge or condemn. It sees no sin or
guilt anywhere but rather beholds errors that can be undone.

The Holy Spirit undoes all errors committed by anyone at any time. There is no
error too big to be forgiven, all its consequences undone; and the mind that
believed in its errors is freed of all false beliefs. The Holy Spirit sees all
things as either Truth or illusion. He forgives all illusion by overlooking it
and undoing its consequences, and He reinforces and strengthens everything in
your mind that is true or that points in the direction of Truth. The mind of
forgiveness is His gift to you, for you cannot practice true forgiveness
without His help. The human mind in itself is not capable of forgiving its
brothers all their “sins” for it sees them as real, and what is real, what has
caused actual pain and loss, cannot be forgiven.

The Holy Spirit’s function is to teach you true forgiveness, and through your
honest learning do you become able to receive the mind of forgiveness to
replace the mind of fear and separation. To forgive guilt in all its perceived
forms is to heal fear, for fear always accompanies guilt and strengthens it in
your mind. When your mind is given over to forgiveness, joy and happiness will
be yours; they follow forgiveness as surely as grief and pain follow guilt. You
cannot be happy unless you forgive, for to forgive is to Love. The refusal to
forgive is an attack upon your brother and yourself; attack will always lead to
fear and drive Love from your mind.

## Choose Again
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Whenever you are tempted to be as you are not, ask yourself this question: Am I
a body, doomed to suffer and die, alone and isolated in a world of fear and
separation? Or am I the Holy Son of God, forever free, loved and loving,
eternally at peace within the mind of God? The answer to this question
determines what you experience yourself to be and the condition in which you
find yourself.

You are not a body unless you choose to be. You made this choice once, and it
continues to operate in your mind and determines your experience of yourself
and the world. There is no law binding you to your present condition except the
law that governs choice. What you choose is what you get. A choice made long
ago continues in effect until it is revisited and decided against, or replaced
by choosing differently. This is a simple and direct process, but by no means
is it an easy one.

You who have forgotten who you are so long ago it has been erased even from
your memory, need help just to recognize your error and accept the possibility
of correction. To continue as you have been doing is meaningless; it is
necessary to recognize this fact and open your mind to the true alternative,
that it may be given you. In truth, no choice is possible or necessary, for you
cannot be but what you are and what you have always been. Yet in dreams do you
seem to be what you are not; your belief makes it real in your experience. So
does choice become necessary and seemingly possible, for through the power of
choice you have made a self to take the place of what you are in Truth. Through
choosing again, will the Truth of what you are return to your awareness, making
all further choice unnecessary.

Until that happens however, you must choose again and again, for all that is
untrue in your mind must be uncovered and undone. The Holy Spirit will guide
you carefully and direct your choices, if you turn over to Him the power of
decision. He alone is able to use it wisely for He knows what is true and
recognizes what is false, and never confuses the two. You must patiently learn,
you must be shown, the difference between Truth and illusion, and the
consequences that follow your choices. To choose either is to have all of it,
for you cannot choose partially. Truth is One, and illusion also; this fact
should make choosing easy. Yet the mind long accustomed to separation, to
seeing choice where there is none, must learn to see truly, that it may let
itself be guided in making the only choice truly possible.

When once you begin to let the Holy Spirit guide you to decide for what is
true, it will become easier with each choice, as the results will demonstrate
the rightness of your decision. The proof is in the pudding, the result you
get. You will quickly learn to prefer the results of right choice, for the Holy
Spirit guides you toward happiness and peace, and away from fear and pain. Who
could fail to recognize the difference between results so different in every
way? Sanity would choose joy over sadness, Love over fear, happiness over
sorrow. Sanity recognizes what is needed and helpful, and does not confuse it
with the painful and the unnecessary.

To choose that which causes you pain is clearly insane, yet this is what you do
when you choose the ego as your guide, rather than the Holy Spirit. The ego
will never lead you anywhere but further into fear and pain, for that is all it
knows. The ego is not your friend, though that is what it would have you
believe. To befriend the ego, to choose it as your guide to life, is to assure
disaster. To consciously choose a course of action that will consistently
result in disappointment, uncertainty, and pain, is surely insane. Yet this is
what you do when you identify with the ego, the sense of separate identity
centered in the body. The body is the ego’s chosen home; when you identify with
the body you have chosen the ego as your self.

## Your One Responsibility
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

The ego is not what you are, but is rather a mistaken idea about what you are.
It is a part of your belief about yourself, the belief in separation, and from
and around this belief has arisen a whole thought system of separation. This
thought system operates ceaselessly to occupy your awareness. In the
identification with the constant stream of thoughts, desires, and impulses, a
sense of being a person, an identity to whom these thoughts belong, arises.
This is simply an error, and is itself a kind of thought. *I am the body, I am
the thinker,* is the basic error of mind that lies at the root of the
misidentification.

When the wish to be as you are not rises to tempt you, ask yourself this
question: Do I want pain and misery to follow me and fear to darken my mind? Or
do I want perfect peace, joy, Love, and happiness to light up my mind and shine
away all darkness? There is, of course, only one answer to this question, and
it is self-evident; it is not evident, however, to the mind long accustomed to
choosing illusion.

Living so long as a body in a world of bodies and separation that even the
memory of what you are has disappeared from awareness, you can no longer see
the obvious, for it is hidden behind a heavy veil of complexity. Your mind is
established in habits that have worn grooves so deep, you cannot see over the
sides. You do not see the present, and the possibilities and opportunities it
holds. Only the past, projected out and seen as if it were now, is visible to
the mind of separation. Such a mind cannot see what is there, for it is covered
by a thick cloud of confusion. You are confused about what you are, what your
function is, who created you, where you came from, and where you are going.
Your cause and effect have been reversed, and you know not the laws of mind by
which you live.

The process of Atonement is an undoing or correction of all the falsity, the
illusion, that clouds your holy mind. The Holy Spirit guides this process in
time; through your willingness and surrender, your mind is made empty and free
of all that has occupied it for so long. Into this empty and purified mind, the
Truth will come and claim Its own. Even now your mind is a part of Truth, but
must be purified before you can know Truth again. To purify your mind is to
welcome Truth, for It waits but for your invitation; a place made clean within
your mind is not long empty before Holiness returns to set you free.

Your one responsibility is to accept Atonement for yourself. In this one act of
acceptance, the acceptance of your one responsibility, is awakening assured;
everything necessary for it to occur is included in that single declaration of
allegiance. This acceptance, which is all inclusive, is repeated again and
again throughout the day, day after day, as you learn to choose Truth over
illusion. Your task and your constant focus is to remember this responsibility;
the continuous false activity of your mind requires a constant vigilance and a
consistent response to be undone.

The mind must be undone thought by thought, and all its dark corners, its
secret hidden places where guilt flourishes, uncovered and brought to Light.
Not one spot of darkness can be left to mar the intrinsic brightness of your
holy mind. The only task to which your mind can be put that is worthy of it, is
just this continuing watchfulness and conscious choosing of Truth. The
functioning of illusion in your mind persists only through your support. The
energy of your mind animates illusion, allowing it to maintain its hold over
you. Withdraw that support by refusing to allow illusion to function freely. By
choosing against all false thoughts and impulses, you thereby return the energy
and attention of your mind to the Truth where it belongs. Over time, false
thoughts and beliefs, the whole movement of illusion in your mind, will wither
away.

## Freedom of Mind
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Your mind would be free. Deep within you is a yearning for freedom that has
never ceased. It is the nature of your mind to be free, free to create, to
love, to be itself. The desire to return Home, to recover the freedom of the
Kingdom, will not be satisfied with substitute goals or attempts to find
freedom where it cannot be found. Only in being your Self will you find
fulfillment and true freedom.

The body will never be free, for it was made to limit the mind and reduce it to
a tiny thing, helpless and alone, cowering behind a wall of flesh that is
itself fragile and impermanent. Mind has always been free, and will be free
again when you choose freedom and only freedom. A dream of death and
imprisonment can never hold the mind prisoner that God created holy and free.
Only your decision seemed to limit your mind, and only your decision will set
it free.

## Leaving the Dream
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

What is the purpose of life in this world? Does anything you do here give your
life authentic meaning? The many activities with which you keep yourself so
busy, the pursuit of pleasure, the attempts to reach various goals, all have
one purpose: to keep God away. Although you long for Him unceasingly, this
longing is suppressed and displaced, leading you to chase illusions, to try and
fill the deep emptiness inside with what will never satisfy. This terrible
emptiness is the absence of your true relationship with your Father. Nothing
else will heal this wound but to return to Him, where you belong. Now is the
time to leave this world of sorrows and empty dreams. You never wanted it; it
is but an error in your mind, easily corrected when you no longer desire
illusion, but choose Truth instead.

Accept the Holy Spirit’s purpose for the world, not the ego’s. He knows the
only meaningful purpose the world has or will ever have. The world is a place
where God’s Son comes but for a little while to learn, to remember, Who He is
in Truth; and then He is gone, returned to His true Home, to be seen no more.
All the love he felt, the love he gave, and every act of kindness, remain
behind to help those in need. His Vision, his words of Truth, and the example
he set, likewise remain to inspire and heal those who struggle still. And they
will leave, each in turn, as the readiness to be Truth arises in their mind.

Each one that awakens helps to make it a little easier for his brothers, until
all have returned to the Kingdom, the world of illusion has vanished, and only
Truth remains. Such will be the end of the dream, all dreamers awakened and all
dreaming undone, to vanish along with time and space. Time and space are but
part of the dream; when the time of dreaming is done, they too will be no more.

If you would leave the dream, if suffering has lost its appeal, and the
emptiness of all things in time is clearly seen, you must dedicate yourself to
the only task worthy of accomplishment: the awakening to the Truth of what you
are, the realization of the Self, and the leaving of this world forever. In
this awakening are all your brothers included, for they are part of you, as you
are part of them. By their inclusion do you accept the Unity of Being; it is
this acceptance that sets you free.

When the mind is focused on the Self, as the Self, nothing can go wrong, for
the Self is unperturbed by anything that happens, being not of this world. Only
the mind that has limited itself by thinking it is a body, is seemingly subject
to the ups and downs, the problems and sorrows, that characterize life in
separation. Only your misidentification hurts you, for thereby do you make the
dream real and assign yourself a role guaranteed to bring fear, pain, and
suffering, whatever else it may also bring.

You are the hero of your dream; all that happens is what you wish, no matter
how you may resist this thought. Your responsibility for what happens to you is
total, for nothing can enter your life against your will. Yet you have
forgotten, and this forgetting obscures the role you play in making the world
and seems to leave you at the mercy of forces outside of you, absolving you of
responsibility and allowing you to project guilt and judgement, thus
maintaining the fiction of a separate world.

If this world were indeed completely separate from you, you would be helpless
and no escape would be possible. Be then glad that the world you see is a
projection of your mind, a dream you are dreaming, and thus is salvation
possible for no one is doing anything to you; you are doing it to yourself. You
are the dreamer of the dream, and are completely responsible for what happens,
no matter what the appearance. You need but change your mind and the world you
see will change accordingly.

Through forgiving eyes, through the Vision of Christ, you see a world in which
Heaven is reflected; you see the Light in everything, and feel the Love of God
surrounding you. The One Unity that embraces All will be self-evident, as you
see that everything is in you, and you are in everything.

## Your Thought System
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

After the initial acceptance of responsibility for your life, the next step
that must be taken is to see and understand that how you use your mind actually
determines your perception and your experience. Your thoughts, the ones you
choose and the ones you choose against, shape your world and your experience of
it. There is nothing you do that is not affected and determined by your thought
system. You literally cannot see anything unless you have accepted it first in
thought, although this is not apparent to the conscious mind because it is only
aware of the thoughts it currently holds, at this moment. Yet it is obvious
that the mind holds many many thoughts at the subconscious levels, for it is
the entire thought system that makes consistent response, and a sense of
constant identity, possible. The thought system to which you adhere must exist
continuously in your mind, although most of it is unconscious at any given
moment, or your mind and your life would simply be chaos.

The pattern that is your life is an expression of your adherence to your
thought system, and the inevitable contradictions that characterize the egoic
mind. The ego’s nature includes a constant tendency towards chaos, for it is an
invention born of fear and made as defense against Truth. To exclude Truth is
chaos and this fact cannot be avoided or circumvented. Consequently, every
human life lived under the ego’s thought system is subject to chaos and
contradiction. In the recognition of this fact and the conflict and suffering
that result, the real motivation to change, to seek another way to think and
live, will arise. There is no need to continue down a path that leads to where
you do not want to go. 

When this realization dawns, you are ready to take the next step. You do not
know what it is but in the willingness to be shown, it becomes possible. What
is very important at this stage, and indeed throughout the spiritual journey,
is the recognition that you know nothing, you do not know what anything truly
means. You must learn a completely new thought system, and learn in a
completely new way. In order to learn, you must forget everything you believed
before, because you were wrongly taught.

The Holy Spirit is in charge of this learning process which is both an
unlearning, an undoing of what you learned before, and a learning of what is
true, helpful, and necessary, to take its place. This process unfolds in time
and requires great willingness, dedication, surrender, and perseverance on your
part. It need not take long, for it is possible to return to God in any moment;
yet the process of awakening occurs gradually and progressively for most.

The attitude that is most fruitful is to be patient, infinitely patient,
turning your life over to the guidance of the Holy Spirit, maintaining the
constant vigilance and willingness to learn what is required, and remaining
open and ready for the experience of Truth every moment. Truth is always
present and waiting to return to your mind; there is no time when It is absent
or inaccessible. You need only meet the conditions of Truth for It to fill your
mind once again.

All the help you need, and are willing to accept, will be given you; help is
never lacking and is always available. The inability to perceive and receive
it, is the only limit. All power in Heaven and on earth stands ready to assist;
but it can assist only those who truly desire it, and welcome it with love and
humility. Help is given you in many different ways according to the need, for
the miracle is always a solution to a specific problem. It matters not what the
problem is, for there is no order of difficulty in miracles.

The problems the miracle heals all have one essential thing in common: They are
illusions. The various characteristics of illusions have no meaning, if they be
part of illusion. The miracle corrects the false perception in which the
illusory problem occurs. It matters not the size or nature of illusion, for
illusion is illusion, and correction does not depend on apparent differences
between them. What is not real disappears, for Truth has come to claim Its Own,
shining illusion away.

Whatever the apparent problem, the Holy Spirit has the solution, if you will
turn it over to Him. He will tell you your part and help you fulfill it, if you
let Him. When you develop the habit of turning over all problems to Him, you
will quickly learn, through experience, how beneficial it is, and you will
leave behind the temptation to rely on yourself alone. To rely on yourself is
to turn over decision making to the ego, which you surely know by now is a
mistake. You want the real solutions to your problems provided by the Holy
Spirit, not the false responses of the ego that perpetuate illusion and make
certain that no problem is truly solved.

Remember, and remember well, that you never make decisions alone. They are
always made with a guide: the Holy Spirit or the ego, the thought system
arising from Truth or the thought system of separation. These are the only
possible guides no matter what the time, place, or circumstances. Of these two,
only one helps you choose truly and in your highest interest. When you decide
by “yourself,” you are choosing with the guide to fear, pain, and suffering,
thus deciding self-destructively. With every decision you make, you are
affecting everything, for no choice is made in isolation. Even in the dream,
all minds are joined. What is done by one affects all; it cannot be otherwise.

The most beneficial thing you can do for the world, for all your brothers, is
to choose only Love, only Light, only Truth, at all times. Let this dedication
be the source of everything you do.

