---
ref: "17"
title: "The Living Christ"
subtitle: "A message from the Voice of Christ through a Choir of Angels in the presence of Archangel Raphael and Archangel Gabriel"
---

## I. Prelude

Beings that enlighten the world! Pure souls, we thank you once again for
opening your hearts to the flow of divine union, a flow in which we bring
wisdom that is not of the world. We do it by the will of the Father who loves
you with infinite love. We do it in response to your loving call. We do this by
means of this chant of praise from our Heavenly chorus that your self
recognizes as the voice of truth. We are a multitude of love. We are one and
many, united in light that will never wane.

Please understand how invaluable is the beauty of your soul. You cannot imagine
how beautiful you are, nor how much joy you give us by the simple fact of your
existence. Your existence is a joy for all creation. By the mere fact of being
you manifest the wonders of God. For that is what you are: the living miracle
of a God who is infinite love. Meditate on the value of your soul. Free your
memory to recollect the glory of your divinity. You are souls made by God. You
are human spirits fused to divine essence. You are one with God. Think about
this truth every day, for in this truth lies the infinite mercy of you who are,
the resurrected of God. Meditate on this unfathomable mystery, the mystery of
infinite love that no angelic or human mind could ever fully comprehend. We
assure you that your joy will be complete in the contemplation of this mystery
of Divine Mercy.

Souls who have found the true love that is the living Christ! The time has come
to begin to live now and forever as you are in truth. We speak of walking on
Earth as the living Christ is that of which we speak. You are Christ. The
Father created all that is true, all that is love, all that is beauty. This
truth will set you free. This truth will give you a joy that is not of the
world, a peace that cannot be obliterated, a sense of being that you have never
achieved in your vain attempt to be what you could never be.

Christ is the attributeless self that God extended to his creation and that we
share. Christ is that with which, in His divine grace, the Father has given.
Christ is a gift. Christ is the identity of love. Christ is the expression of
God’s will that you be a radiant soul shining with pure potentiality. Keep this
truth in your hearts joyfully, and in the twinkling of an eye all the
magnanimity of God will be present in your life. To firmly believe this, to
understand it well, and to accept it as your salvation and total liberation
from pain is what will bring the Second Coming to you.

## II. The Incarnation of Christ In You

Soul of God! The angels of Heaven rejoice. You have been chosen in the plan to
embody the living Christ. The path you’ve traveled has taken you exactly to the
point here, receiving with love this glorious manifestation of truth. Here,
now, where you think you are, you step forward from the fork in the road. It is
important to remember that everything has contributed to this point in a
mysterious and yet observable way.  You are in the perfect position to accept
that you are nothing other than the Christ of God.

The Christ within is how you bring love to Earth. Accept and live the truth
that you are the incarnate Christ fulfilling your purpose in physical creation
and living in harmony with God’s will. The Second Coming of Christ is not a
theatrical spectacle. It is not a cosmic revolution to report. The Second
Coming is a term that expresses a fact pertaining to individual or personal
consciousness—something that very much concerns you who receive these words.

This voice from Heaven was scribed by a friendly hand who— in union with God’s
plan—is consciously transforming himself into what you are each called to be: a
pencil in the hands of love. In this joyful expression of love, expressed in
human words, we will go beyond all the symbols that have previously been used
to try to describe the indescribable, the Second Coming; beyond the allegorical
language used to imply what is beyond all understanding and all learning. In
this body of revelation we leave all that behind. In other words, we’re not
interested in going beyond your self. You are a universe in yourself. Remember,
this work is expressed from a triune heart to a triune heart. We communicate
in the fullness of communion, which is the true language of love. We don’t
speak to the world. We don’t speak to a group. We don’t speak to the universe,
at least in the sense that the world understands that term.

These words are addressed to you, soul of God, you who the Father of lights
calls true light, which is to say, your indefinable self. Everything revealed
here is ineffable revelation put into words to reach your human understanding.
These words will resonate in your soul. They are yours. Allow them to come
alive in you. Do not read with your mind, or with that part you may call
“heart” but that is actually the emotional body. Let these words enter
unfathomable depths, into the abyss of consciousness you are, to be immersed
in the ocean that is your true heart. Remember, nothing can hold you back.
Nothing can limit you. You are free, eternally free, forever unlimited. This
cannot change. In this impossibility of change lies the immutability of the
truth of you. In the absolute impossibility of limiting your freedom lies the
truth that sets you free.

## III. To Co-Create and To Be

You are a co-creator. You know that. You have co-believed, or co-created, with
the ego. You can co-create or co-believe with God. Creation at any level is an
act of union. You cannot create in isolation. In the world there are acts that
you call “creative”—although they are not truly creative in the sense of divine
creation but rather are ingenious—having been developed from something else.
Inventions in your world build from a basis, a starting point. You can’t invent
an automobile if you haven’t first invented an engine. An engine was
necessary even to conceive of the idea of being transported by a machine.

You are the co-creator of your desires, your feelings, your thoughts, and your
emotions. You are also the co-creator of the interpretation you make of all
things, and with that, your experience. This is how it always has been and
always will be. In other words, you create the interpretation of reality—but
not the reality itself, for reality is only created by God. Only pure love is
real, since He is love and nothing but love. Since reality does not need any
interpretation but simply is, by creating an interpretation, you make reality
different for you, at least in your experience. That’s what you do every
moment: co-create interpretations that lead to a particular experience. But
to do that you must join something or someone. This is why the egoic identity
is a set of complex mental constructs developed by generations upon generations
of minds that preceded you. That is what you call learning. Never is anything
co-created in solitude. What options do you have to co-create? You can either
join with fear or with love. And your creations, both physical and
non-physical, demonstrate the basis upon which you co-created.

God is the only Creator in the sense that God creates all things. Things did
not create Him. God is a creative source that creates love and nothing but
love. Yet even God cannot create outside of union. Joining is required to
create. Creation is extension. If the one who creates does not extend
“something” to which it is attached, then one is not creating. God creates from
Himself because He has no basis except Himself of pure love. Love is the only
thing that can be created because it is the only basis from which anything can
be created. The Father cannot join anything other than love, for only love is
real. In truth there is no such thing as the absence of love. This is what we
mean when we say that God is the alpha and omega.

Even though God is the only Creator, you are not excluded from the creative
capacity of God. God can create only love. Similarly, only in your union with
the living Christ can you extend the Kingdom of Heaven. Christ is the Kingdom.
Only in Christ and with Christ can you be who you really are because only your
Christ identity is true. Only in union with your Christ identity can you create
the good, the holy, and the perfect, for Christ is the good, the holy, and the
perfect. Christ is your true self. This is why you are beauty, holiness, and
perfection personified.

## IV. You Are In God

For Christ to live in you is to remain in the unity with God that you are. Your
resistance to accepting this truth is what has caused the drama of your
experience and the drama of the world. Yet this has been your choice before
time and must be respected and honored. Remember that you are always free.
Reversing this mechanism of rebellion is the solution to every problem in the
world. Living as the Christ you are in truth is your only function as
worshipers of the Second Coming. There is no need to wait for the Second
Coming. There’s no need to go anywhere or do anything.

The most radical revelation that this manifestation expresses is that you are,
now and always, the Heaven in which the Christ of God dwells. Christ doesn’t
come. Christ never left. Christ never left you. If you want to use the symbols
of the Second Coming it must be said that Christ comes, but it comes in you,
for there is no other place where it can dwell but in your heart, which is the
center of your self, where it has always been and always will be. If Christ did
not live forever in your heart, you could not exist. Love is the foundation of
your self. Remember that Christ has a single abode, and that abode is your
heart.

The love that Christ is inhabits all hearts, not only yours, and not only in
what you call humanity. Christ is present in everything that exists. You have
heard this many times. You know about God’s immanent presence in all things.
However—and in this lies the revelation of this work—dwelling does not mean to
manifest. Christ dwells in everything, but manifests his glory only in the
docile hearts that welcome him, in the humble hearts that are carried away by
love, in the hearts of lovers of truth. Christ is the pure potential of the
self that is love. Love is also his expression. In a sense we can say that love
is like a seed planted in the Garden of Eden that is your heart and from where
all creative potential can manifest in holiness. There is no abode for Christ
other than yourself, for Christ and yourself are one, just as it is in us. The
Second Coming is the actual expression within form of the fullness of the
living Christ. If you realize this truth here and now, you are yourself the
Second Coming—the living Christ. You are love.

Beloved of Heaven that you are in truth! This is a great revelation. Rejoice
with all your heart. Wait no longer for the coming of Christ as an outward fact
in time. That would be like waiting for Heaven after death. That misguided way
of thinking has already been left behind. You live now in the resurrection. You
are the resurrected. You are the redeemed. You are the Second Coming. You are
the living Christ.

## V. Your New Humanity

It is not enough to recognize that you are the living Christ. You have come far
along the way to truth and you know that you no longer live alone, but that
Christ lives in you.  Since you are already well grounded in this wisdom that
is not of the world, your mind does not resist it any more. However, that spark
of light that is the love of Christ must be extended, made known, and be
manifested, as that is the only way for you to know yourself. Knowledge is
manifested in an act of sharing. Christ must be shared to be known. This is
what true sharing means: to allow Christ express itself through you. This is
not a matter of following a new commandment, but it is the only way for you to
manifest, or share, yourself in the truth of who you are and thereby abolish
suffering. All suffering has its root in a rebellion in which you limit the
expression of the love that you are. This is what causes the tension that you
constantly feel and is the source of all tension in the world.

At this point—and we assure you that you have come much further than you
imagine—you may ask, how can I live in the world as a being from Heaven? How
can I live on Earth as a God-man? How can I live life always being the living
Christ in all times, places, and circumstances? How can I express the love that
God is in a world without love? How can I live uniquely and exclusively in
truth, regardless of the apparent events of my daily life?

These important questions reveal a confusion that we have come to clarify. You
know the answers, but the world makes you easily forget. Keep in mind that you
are starting to remember. Your memory, which comes from the vault of divine
memory, is still like a beautiful bud, green and freshly sprouted. Such an
outbreak full of beauty and potentiality must be cared for, cherished, and
nourished. The Christ child who lives in you must first learn to crawl, then
walk, then run, and finally fly. Once you feel confident that you will be able
to fly the flight of the soul, then your Father will help you. But there is
time for that. There’s no rush.

Everything is easy in the way of God. Everything is fluent, free, malleable.
It’s all joy. Everything is included in love. Sisters and brothers in love, you
have a perfect example of how to live on Earth as God. Jesus has given it. His
teachings and exemplary life are more than enough to know how to be here as
the living Christ. But what is often forgotten is that Jesus of Nazareth, the
historical Jesus in whom the consciousness of Christ manifested itself in
fullness—as it did also in his mother Mary did not come to advocate the
creation of an ideal self, a mental idol, that you must follow as if you were
so unworthy that you must abhor yourself and imitate that ideal. Christ cannot
be cloned. Love cannot be duplicated. The unique expression of the one and only
love that each of you are cannot be copied. You are not called to imitate. You
are called to be what you truly are, just as God created you to be. There will
never be two identical souls. There are not and never will be two identical
beings. There are not and never will be two identical ways of expressing love.
Even in your own life you don’t express love in the same way as when you loved
as a child, or when you love as an adult. Love makes all things new, always.

## VI. Jesus and Mary, the Way to Follow

You are mistaken if you think that Jesus came to create a structure of rules,
dogmas, and rituals. Although he gave fullness to the law, submitting to and
melting with the law of love, nowhere in his teachings is there anything like
an instruction to create an ideal self. Jesus is the one who gave a face to
love, just like you. That is the truth about Jesus and Mary, and what their
joint will is for you. This is what we intended when we brought to you the
devotion of the union of the three hearts. If at all times you were to refer
every question to Jesus or Mary—thinking like them, feeling like them, acting
like them, and finally loving like them—then you would be like them, not in
form but in essence, in the consciousness of Christ that moved them both. This
means that the only thing you should do—not only you, but all creation—is to be
authentically who you are in Christ, living always in the truth and nothing but
the truth. The rest will be added unto you.

Your function is to give a unique face to love. That’s what it means to be the
Christ living you, here and now.

You may keep asking yourself how to do that. If that kind of question still
exists in your mind, remember that it does not come from the true self but from
an old pattern of thought that still believes that self is something that has a
cost—that some kind of effort must be applied to change yourself. That pattern
of thought is what will fall away forever and you will experience the joy of
simply being without adding attributes to the self. You will begin to detach
yourself from the false hope of being more than you are, and the false belief
that to do so is necessary, possible, or desirable.

## VII. I Am Who I Am

This work is not asking you to be saints, nor to be enlight ened, nor to be
Christ. The goal is not to look for anything, but simply to be what is in every
moment united to the living Christ. Labels are not of interest because our
consciousness holds what is unspeakable.

We, together with you, are ineffable. We no longer seek to predetermine
anything about the self. We abandon self-esteem. We abandon every definition
we’ve ever had about ourselves or others. We just are. We rest in nothingness.
We rest in the arms of attributeless love. We rest in the certainty of being
who we are. We don’t want to be anything in particular, or anyone special. We
just are. We don’t have a name or words to describe ourselves. We live in the
world with heart and mind in our God. We recognize that we are where the mind
is. We recognize that if the mind is joyfully thinking of God, then we are with
God. If our treasure is love, then that is where our heart will be. We accept
that we are the inexpressible of God. We abandon all labels, every name, every
judgment, and enjoy the sheer abstraction that is our soul. Through
observation without judgment we rejoice in the immensity of our self. We simply
are. And because we are, we do God’s will, because God is.

Now we are immersed together, you and we who are divine unity made reality, in
the unfathomable realm of holiness.

Beloved of God, feel the embrace of our love. Feel the music of the harps that
in the Heaven of your holy mind is heard as a harmony we sing together for all
who are the living Christ. Stay in the presence of love. Be accompanied by the
truth that is always true, repeating in the silence of your soul, as often as
you feel the need to do it, this declaration of freedom:

> I am who I am. \
> I don’t have a name. \
> My brother is what he is. \
> He doesn’t have a name. \
> Everything is what it is. \
> Nothing has a name. \
> I reside in the nothingness of God. \
> I am the pure abstraction of love. \
> I am the pure potential of self. \
> I am. \
> This is the truth.

