---
ref: "Chapter One"
title: "Truth Returns"
---

Whenever humans are gathered together in Love, to fulfill Love’s purpose, I am
there. No one can fail to seek the Truth. Every human mind is looking for Truth
although you may not be conscious of that fact. Ultimately it does not matter
whether you understand the true goal of human life, for you will be drawn to it
in time. Until then you may substitute goals of your own making, goals without
meaning, for the Truth you really seek. It does not matter. All things
purposeless and temporary will pass away leaving only Truth in the end. The end
is certain as are the means through which it is reached. You can make use of
them when and where you choose. That and only that is up to you. To wait, or to
decide for Truth here and now, are your only two options. If you make this
decision now, you can save yourself much time and suffering. And I strongly
recommend you do so.

## The Beginning
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

What you do with your mind is all-important, for life is of the mind; even in
this world your life takes place in consciousness. No matter how misidentified
with the body the mind may be, if you are not aware of something, it does not
exist for you. When you are unconscious, such as in a coma, do you have a life? 

The function of mind is to be aware. In this world, awareness takes the form of
perception, both inner and outer, and cognition. Understanding ties these two
together to produce meaning which leads to purpose. Purpose is decided on the
basis of the value you assign to the meaning you perceive. If something is
meaningful to you, it is because of the value you see in it. Values are highly
personal and can vary greatly, as can the perception of meaning. This
variability contributes significantly to the chaos and conflict so visibly
present in human life. 

A multitude of individuals, pursuing multiple and sometimes conflicting goals
based on starkly different perceptions of meaning, can hardly bring about a
condition of peace in which all share equally. Only a common perception of the
value of a shared goal, can bring about a unification of purpose. A meaningful
goal that appeals to all, must arise from a recognition of the equal worth of
each and every human being, without exception. 

This recognition cannot happen on the level of ego mind, for it must arise from
a deeper place, a higher state, where all are joined as one. The Unity in which
all live and move and have their Being, is the Source of all that is true,
good, and beautiful in human life. To deny this Unity, to shatter It into
separate parts with no meaningful relationship to one another, is the ego’s
purpose and the condition of its birth. The ego is constantly busy defending
and maintaining the condition of separation. If you identify with the ego and
turn your mind to the fulfillment of its purpose, you will not know peace, and
the meaning of Love will be lost to you. 

As you search for meaning, you may begin to realize that it cannot be found
where it is not; it lies not within the experiences of separation, the limited
perceptions of bodies and other objects, or the conceptualizations that are
meaningless in themselves. In this dawning realization, at first perhaps just a
hint, a glimpse of what lies just beyond everyday experience, you have your
chance to begin, or at least to consider, charting a different course with a
different guide at the helm. Until you are willing to consider there may be a
different way to live, another way of seeing and understanding, a goal that can
be reached, a happiness that can be found; until then you will continue down
the same well-worn path to nowhere, pursuing phantom goals that lay somewhere
up ahead, just out of reach, receding into the distance as you struggle vainly
forward. To pursue a course of action that seeks what cannot be found will lead
to hopelessness and a sense of despair. Hope waits upon your change of mind to
restore it to its rightful place. When hope is invested in what cannot but lead
you back to where you belong, despair will disappear and happiness will take
its place.

## Awakening Insight
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Mind, by its very nature, has to create, to extend itself. This extension is
its natural function, given by God in its creation to be its inherent and
eternal purpose. Its function is blocked when Mind is split and given another
purpose. While this cannot happen in reality, in dreams mind can be seen as if
imbued with qualities it does not possess that give it another function to
fulfill and thus make it unlike itself. Its reality cannot be lost, but can be
veiled and reduced through distortion to what seems to be completely different. 

Abilities can be invented to take Reality’s place; what is all powerful and
forever free can seem to be a weak and pitiful thing, tied to a form destined
for destruction, imprisoned by fear, and threatened by all that appears to
surround it. How can that which is limitless and beyond threat of any kind
become a limited form sentenced to pain, sickness, suffering, and death? No one
in this world asks this important question, for Reality has been lost so long
ago that not even its memory remains. 

Yet somewhere in your mind abides the knowledge that has been forgotten, kept
for you by the Holy Spirit Who resides deep in your unconscious mind, beyond
the superficial levels populated by the ego. If He were not there linking you
with your Creator still, you would be lost indeed in a self-made hell without
hope of escape. His Presence guarantees the end of suffering and illusion, and
the return Home to the Reality you left but in dreams. 

Yet dreams are real to the dreamer and illusions are strong in their effects.
No one asleep in this world thinks what he sees is but imagination, without the
power to affect him unless he wished it so. Wish makes a world and projection
establishes it as you would have it be. Desire produces form and belief gives
it reality through perception. Yet is illusion, illusion still. Reality is not
the result of idle wishes placed outside the mind that thought them and
esteemed them as true. Reality is One, all parts joined in a Unity that extends
forever, created by God in His Likeness and all encompassed by His Being; It
leaves not the Mind of Its Creator to appear as if outside and separate.
Madness makes a world that could not be, carving separate figures out of what
is One. These shadows appear to move about, and come and go, until the Light of
Love returns to shine them away. 

Is this what you truly want? Or would you not rather awaken to your natural
state of peace, Love, and freedom, of absolute safety and Oneness with all of
Life and your Creator, forever and ever without end? If the answer to this
question is yes, and only the insane would answer no, the contrast is made
clear between Truth and illusion, your real identity established by God in your
creation and the illusion of the self made in dreams. You choose sanity or
insanity as your state of mind and experience. One or the other must always
prevail. There is nothing in between these two choices, and the one you choose
at any given time determines your experience until you choose again. 

The means are given you when you are ready and willing to use them. All the
help that you need, and are willing to accept, will be given. Nothing is held
back that would be beneficial in any way. If you would use what is given you as
means by which to escape this world, you must learn and accept the fact that
you know nothing. All the learning that you acquired in the past, all that you
taught yourself to believe, is meaningless and will only obscure the present.
Your focus must be shifted from the past to the present, and what is past must
be completely forgotten to make way for Truth. You cannot reach the Truth
through learning, but learning can help prepare the way for Truth’s return, if
it be guided by the One Whose function it is to lead you Home. 

What has been learned through the ego’s eyes can only blind you to the Truth,
for the ego’s purpose is to obstruct Truth in every way, that it may be
replaced by the illusions of fear and separation. The ego does not recognize or
understand Truth but it does recognize threat, for the Truth would free you
from the ego’s dominion and completely undo the effects of separation forever.
Until then, you must be vigilant and remember constantly that you are choosing
between two alternatives with every thought, feeling, word, and act; and of
these two only one is real. One choice leads to suffering, pure and simple; the
other to the end of suffering. Who but the insane would find this choice
difficult? Madness obscures; that is its function. To darken the mind and
conceal what would otherwise be crystal clear is the inevitable result if the
mind is devoted to insanity as its goal. 

Do not accept the ego’s goal as yours nor let its purpose betray you. The ego
has never supported your true and highest interest, and it never will. Only
your decision seems to give it the power to direct your thoughts, control your
understanding, and distort and reduce your perception. To choose sanity is to
choose against the ego in every way. This is the only choice you will ever have
to make. 

## Help is Needed
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Do you want the Truth or don’t you? It is not necessary to understand what
Truth is or how to find it to answer yes. In fact, to realize Truth requires
the recognition of your complete ignorance. No one living in separation from
their Source can even begin to understand what is far beyond experience,
perception, and learning. Reality cannot be found by a mind living in
isolation, alone and separate. 

You will be given the means and directed how to apply them. Help is needed to
break out of the self-enclosed prison in which you appear to be living; it must
come from beyond the circle of nothingness that seems to surround you. No one
can escape this world alone. Help must come from beyond separation, from beyond
the mind that sees partially and understands nothing that it sees. Only a
perspective that sees everything, recognizes the difference between Truth and
illusion, and knows you as you truly are, could guide you out of the chaotic
maze of madness wherein your mind has imprisoned itself. 

Learning to differentiate between Truth and illusion is not an easy task, but
you must learn to see clearly. Confusion rules the self-imprisoned mind:
confusion about what is true and what is false; about who, what, and where you
are; about the nature and meaning of what you see. The mind that sleeps yet
thinks itself awake does not know itself. The self it appears to be in dreams
is the means by which the true Self is replaced. Yet a self that is not real
cannot take the place of Truth, unless that is your wish. A self born of the
wish to be what you are not, and not be what you are, must be a thing of
madness and not a Self at all. An image, worshipped and acclaimed as it may be,
could never be the Son that God created. He does not create what perception
rules, a tiny thing that crumbles into dust when its little life is over.  

Whenever the decision is made to be what you are not, to act as if the state of
separation is your home, you will lose. What is lost is not known to you as
long as the decision against it remains in force. You cannot know what you are
while you are choosing to be what you are not. To choose illusion is to choose
against Truth, as they are mutually exclusive, and the presence of one is the
absence of the other. You would never choose wrongly if the memory of Truth had
not been driven from your mind and lost to you, until you decide for It once
again. 

To do what needs to be done requires only your willingness, nothing more,
nothing less. To add to what is already complete is unnecessary. The Self is
whole, has everything and lacks nothing. It needs no help to be Itself, but you
need help to clear your mind of all that prevents the memory of the Self from
returning to your awareness. The self you have made has eclipsed what God
created and taken its place in your experience. The experience of the Self and
the experience of the self are completely different in every respect. 

The self is tiny, surrounded by a hostile and uncaring world, separate from
everything it sees. Confined to a body and dominated by fear, it is constantly
changing, driven by an unceasing stream of thoughts, feelings, and impulses
that confuse it and blind it to true beauty, Love, and peace. 

The Self is vast, without boundaries or limits of any kind, like the sky.
Everything It sees is part of It, for It is all encompassing and from Its Unity
is nothing excluded. The Self loves all, embraces all, and from the deep peace
and joy which are Its very nature, It extends Itself creating without beginning
or end. Unshakeable and unchanging, It knows only the True and Eternal. 

Who would not choose the Self if he but knew how easily the memory would
return? Freedom is yours the moment you want it above all else. If you look for
it where it is not, you will not find it. While you are busy identifying
yourself with a body, freedom will never be yours, for it has nothing to do
with form. Freedom is of the Mind. Where mind has been healed of the beliefs
that deny freedom, its natural freedom will return, and you will be happy once
again. 

When the Self has been realized, the freedom of Being will stand revealed.
Never again will you be attracted by brightly colored prison walls or gaily
painted bars that seem to hold out the hope of finding happiness in bondage. Do
not trade the promise of freedom for the meaningless comfort of a body
surrounded by the ephemeral possessions of a material world. This world offers
you nothing but death. Every pleasure, every kind of stimulation, the hollow
honors it bestows, the achievements it holds before your eyes; all serve to
divert your attention from the grim specter of death that stalks you
unceasingly. There is no life here, only a masquerade of life concealing the
real nature of existence and separation. Life is of Mind, and It comes from
beyond the body. The body cannot contain Life nor limit It in any way. Life has
never been born in a body nor lost as the body returns to dust. 

## Learn to Understand
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Without seeing how your mind works, seeing it in action, how can you ever
understand it? You must learn to understand what you do and why, if you are to
bring about the necessary change. The mind is always responding from the past,
and through its responses keeps the past alive, avoids the present, and shapes
a future that is the continuation of the past. Nothing new is allowed to
intervene. And so it goes on and on, the mind repeating itself over and over
again, as life becomes a stale pattern of events trudging wearily onwards
towards a distant goal always just beyond your reach. 

If you would have a future unlike the past, you must change the way you respond
in the present. Your responses in the present moment are either a repetition of
the past or they are something else entirely. Your mind must be free in the
present to rediscover its true nature. The past, operating in the present to
shape and limit it, keeps the mind in bondage. Reality is bypassed, replaced by
what is already over or imagined. Truth can only be realized in the present,
for the present alone is real. The past is memory, the future imagination.
Truth has nothing to do with memory or imagination, and cannot be captured by
images of past or future, being formless and beyond egoic conceptualization. 

The ego, the belief in separation, is maintained by avoidance of the present.
Illusion brought to Truth disappears in Its Presence. The ego avoids the
present by keeping the past alive, thus covering over the present, and assuring
a future that is the projection and continuation of what is already over. Only
thus can it survive. 

If you would realize the Self, you must bring your mind into the present where
Its Reality can be revealed. To live in the past and chase the future is to
live in dreams. The Self cannot be found in dreams. The choice between Truth or
illusion, Love or fear, is the choice between the present or the past. Either
you realize the Self and return to freedom, or you continue as the self always
searching but never finding. 

The self, a self-invented limitation on and denial of what you truly are, will
never be free. How can that which denies itself freedom and is an active
defense against it, find what it is so clearly deciding against? Keeping alive
the past is the means used to completely obscure the present and maintain an
unbroken continuity of illusion based in the past and stretching to the future.
There is no place for Truth in the ego’s world. 

Yet even here Truth cannot be completely obscured, for It waits for you in the
present, underneath the loud and incessant chatter of the ego mind, resting in
deepest peace. A quiet mind is an invitation to Truth to enter and claim its
Home once again. You who have worked so hard to maintain illusion and protect
yourself from Truth, need only lay down your defenses and the Self will return
to your awareness. Only defenselessness will bring you to a true state of
safety. In this condition of harmlessness, you will again know God. 

## The Second Step
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

When Truth is valued once again, the shabby offerings of the ego will be
recognized for what they are: nothingness. What you value determines what you
see, what you seek, and what you think you find. This in turn determines the
direction in which you go, and the experiences and circumstances of your life.
What you choose is what you get. It matters not whether you are conscious of
what you are choosing or the consequences of your choices. Your choosing is
what shapes and controls your life down to the smallest detail. No one and
nothing outside of you is responsible for what happens to you. You are
responsible for what you see, feel, and experience. To accept this
responsibility is absolutely essential if you are to free yourself from the
world and its apparently externally imposed conditions. Nothing can affect you
in any way unless you give it the power to do so.

Whenever the self feels threatened, it responds by attacking itself, although
it does not realize it is doing so. The perceived source of threat is believed
to be the object of its attack in self defense. There are two errors that arise
from this misperception. The self that believes it is threatened, cannot attack
unless it forgets who it is and where its safety truly lies. The Self cannot be
threatened by anything in any way, being invulnerable and kept forever safe in
the Mind of God beyond all space and time. The Self knows only Love and no
attack is possible in the Presence of Love. Love knows not fear, and attack
without fear is impossible. To even consider attack, you must deny and
dissociate from the Self. To do so is to attack the Truth of your Being. Thus
you are always the first victim of your own attack. 

By attacking your brother, even though you perceive attack as justified, you
are again literally attacking yourself, as your brother is yourself. Even in
separation, mind is One; everyone you see is part of you as you are part of
them. The Oneness of the Sonship cannot be lost, though the awareness of It has
vanished from the mind. 

In dreams of separation you play a game of attack and defense, as the role of
attacker shifts back and forth with changing circumstances. Always do you feel
justified in what you do, and the guilt you see is laid upon your brother while
you are innocent. Thus are you twice attacked and once denied, and the belief
in sin and guilt is strengthened once again. Without guilt there could be no
attack. Attack rests on guilt as surely as forgiveness rests upon innocence. 

In truth there is no basis for attack. Attack is never justified. God’s Son is
guiltless. Unless you see Him guilty, you would not attack nor believe you
could be attacked. Attack and defense are complementary parts of the same
belief, for you cannot have one without the other. To believe in attack in any
form will leave you at the mercy of a dangerous world, a world waiting for you
to let down your guard. Life becomes a constant play of fear, of threats real
or imagined stalking you always, waiting for the opportune time to strike. Such
a life is joyless and loveless, for you have chosen fear as your companion, and
Love is not welcome where fear rules. Fear rules its kingdom harshly, allowing
none of its subjects to escape its pitiless gaze. 

Without fear is life a joyous occasion with the constant opportunity to love
and be loved. Only those who love can be truly happy. Happiness, like Love, is
your natural condition and will always prevail unless you choose otherwise. To
fear is to choose otherwise. Although fear does not seem to be a choice, it
rules your mind by your invitation. In different forms it seems to take on
different roles, yet all have but one purpose: to deny Love Its rightful home.
Without Love do you become what you are not, not in Reality but in dreams.
Dreams seem real to the one who made them and then forgot his role as their
maker. They will last until their cause is discovered, and you accept total
responsibility for them. 

## What Comes Before
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

The inevitable result of delusion is the loss of contact with Reality. This is
true in all its forms regardless of degree or kind. When delusion is permitted
to take the place of Reality, only chaos and suffering will result. When
delusion replaces Truth in your mind, a state of consciousness develops that
does not know itself or anything else. To not know yourself must be a state of
utter confusion. You cannot be happy while you do not know who you are or what
your purpose is. God has given you a purpose, a function, and unless you
fulfill it, happiness will elude you. 

Happiness is not the result of external conditions, of achievements, or
pleasures of any kind. The limited satisfaction such things may bring cannot
last nor give you a deep sense of fulfillment. All things of this world come
and go in a ceaseless parade of constantly changing appearances and conditions,
here one moment and gone the next. Happiness is of the Self, your natural
condition as God created you. As part of Truth, it does not come and go nor is
it dependent on changing circumstances. What is true, is true always and
unaffected by change of any kind. You are happy for no reason. Happiness does
not need a reason, it simply is. 

You will never find happiness in this world. It is not here. Even if it could
be found, changing conditions and circumstances would make it impossible to
keep. Happiness can only be found by going beyond this world, back to what is
true. When you find the Self, the Christ, your true identity, you find a joy
and happiness that is lasting and imperishable. 

To find all that is real, your mind must be healed of all that is not. To be
healed is to be restored to Wholeness. All that is limited and partial must
leave your most holy mind that Wholeness can take Its rightful place. When
illusion rules, Truth vanishes, for you can choose one or the other but never
both. A choice for one is a choice against the other, and your state of mind
demonstrates what you have chosen. Joy, peace, and happiness are witnesses for
Truth. Their presence indicates you have chosen sanity, and are recognizing the
difference between madness and Love. In this recognition is the beginning of
your journey homeward. 

While insanity is seen as desirable, as a real choice, you merely travel the
same well-worn path, following a circular route marked by your footsteps since
time immemorial. You are weary now, and are sensing there is an end to the
journey, a goal that waits for you, and a joyous welcome to greet your return.
Heaven is incomplete without you and calls to you unceasingly. When you return
is your decision but return you will, for there is no place else to go. All
other roads start nowhere, go nowhere, and return to nowhere, over and over
again. 

You will continue this senseless journey as long as you prefer madness and
suffering over sanity and peace. While attack and defense limit your mind and
experience, and fear casts its dark shadow across your life, so long will Love
be homeless. When you have finally had enough of meaninglessness, of
helplessness, you will become open to the possibility of another way to live,
and the Holy Spirit will begin to shine into your mind and light your way Home. 

Whenever you are as bathed in Light, your vision will be unobstructed and
clear, and you will see the Light in your brother. Light reaches out to Light,
and in that joining you are One. It is impossible to see the Light in another
and not join with It. Light, like Love, is One. No one is excluded; all are
forever joined together in the One Light. When mind recovers its Wholeness, its
Light begins to shine brightly, dispelling the darkness of the world until you
see the same Light shining everywhere and in everything. When that day comes,
you will rejoice, for you will be seeing truly, as the Light of God in your
mind enables true vision. 

The body’s eyes are incapable of seeing truly, for they were made to see
separation and difference. They can never see Wholeness. That which sees
partially can never see beyond form. Wholeness and Light are beyond form and
are not limited by it. Where differences fade and separation ends, there
Wholeness begins. True vision, wholly unified perception, is of the mind, not
the body; it sees beyond the body to the Light wherein all are joined. The
appearances of form, the distortions of separation, cannot obstruct true vision
or dilute its purity. 

## What Next
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Whenever you are called upon to decide a course of action, only two choices
confront you. In the world of appearances this does not seem to be the case.
There seems to be a variety of possibilities, each different from the others in
form and outcome. Some are judged more desirable than others, some less. In
such a situation, confusion often results and deciding is made difficult. 

Clarity of mind is essential to making right choices. A multitude of apparent
choices makes clear decision making impossible. Such is the situation you face
when you make decisions by yourself. In actuality, no decisions are made in
isolation. What you identify with becomes your guide in decision making.
Identify with the body, with separation, and the ego is your guide, the thought
system of separation is the context. Identify with Spirit, the Self in you,
Truth, and the Holy Spirit will gently direct you. His direction is always in
your highest interest and will lead you away from pain and fear. 

The only two choices possible for you to make, at any time and under any
circumstance, cannot be recognized on the level of form. The world of forms
will always present you with many apparently different possibilities. No matter
what appears before you in form, the content does not vary. Everything is
either true or false. There is nothing in between and no other choices that can
be made. You always choose Truth or illusion in everything you do, say, or
think. Although this may not be apparent, this the law that governs all your
choosing. The content of anything is its meaning, as content and meaning are
inseparable. In the world of form, content is not readily apparent. The purpose
of form is to obscure content beneath a parade of constantly shifting figures
that mask the nothingness they represent but are meant to conceal. 

To choose truly in this world, you need a guide who sees through the masks that
illusion presents to you, to the underlying content and judges truly. He is not
fooled by changing appearances, shifting meanings, or attractive wrappings. He
knows the only distinction that can be made and must be made. Truth or
illusion, Reality or dreams, the only two choices you ever have or ever will
have. You must learn the difference between Truth and illusion and learn it
well, for you are constantly choosing between the two. The Holy Spirit will
lead you along the path of learning if you let Him, for the choice of which
teacher to follow is always up to you. There are only two: one teaches Truth
and gently reveals it to you; the other has been teaching illusion since first
you chose to give him your mind. The ego will continue to teach nothingness and
take you nowhere until you withdraw your allegiance. 

The Holy Spirit can only teach you if you become willing to recognize your
ignorance and willing to let go of all you thought you knew. You need not do
this all at once; indeed, rarely does this happen; but you must be willing to
move in that direction, to let go beliefs, thought patterns, and habitual
behavior, little by little, as you are slowly but surely led back along the
road to Truth. If you are willing to be as nothing, you will discover you are
everything. 

Letting the Holy Spirit determine the learning curriculum is the decision that
allows the return of Truth. This decision must be made again and again until it
becomes completely consistent. Every moment you are choosing your guide to
thinking, feeling, and acting. Many choices are made too quickly to immediately
register in consciousness, but their effects appear as how you are feeling,
thinking, and acting. The state of mind you are experiencing indicates the
choice you have made. If you are abiding in a state of peace, joy, and
happiness, if Love characterizes your thinking and your responses to others,
you have chosen rightly. Any other state of mind is an expression of fear in
one of its many forms, and indicates illusion was your choice. In that case,
the necessity to choose again becomes apparent. 

## The Correction of Error
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Errors of all kinds can be and will be corrected. No error is set in stone,
forever true, and beyond correction. The belief in uncorrectable error is the
belief in sin. The Holy Spirit sees all error as nothing more than some form of
illusion that calls for correction. He knows the Son of God is guiltless no
matter what the appearance in the dream. All errors are corrected and the mind
gently reminded of Truth by the Voice for God. This is His function and He
fulfills it perfectly. 

If you would have all errors corrected by the Holy Spirit and their
consequences undone, you must learn to recognize error in all its forms. Error
unrecognized cannot be corrected, for it is not your will. Any decision made by
you, at any time and under any circumstances, remains in effect until you
decide to change it. All error is simply a wrong decision. 

The Holy Spirit will undo all errors, all belief in illusion, and all the
consequences of wrong decisions, one by one, until your mind is returned to
Wholeness. He cannot do this, however, without your cooperation in every way.
Your active willingness to let all falsity in your mind be undone is your gift
to Him. This willingness must be constantly given, for you are continually
deciding with everything you think, feel, or do. All that passes through your
mind comes from Truth or illusion. Every thought that appears in awareness,
arises from the egoic levels of the unconscious or the deeper level where the
Holy Spirit resides. Constant vigilance is needed to choose rightly. A mind
left to wander habitually, unwatched, cannot be corrected, for you are
condoning its activity by your unawareness. All thought has effects on some
level. 

When you choose to watch your mind moment by moment, to maintain a constant
self-awareness, you will discover your mind is constantly dwelling on the past
or projecting a future. It is never present right now. Thought is never in the
present. Its origin is in the past and its destination is the future; the
present enters not in. Awareness, however, is found only in the present; it is
alive and immediate, never past or anticipated. Through awareness, in
awareness, you are conscious of thoughts. Thoughts arise from the unconscious
and appear in consciousness as if projected onto a screen. All thought comes
from the ego or the Holy Spirit levels of the unconscious. 

The ego attempts to fill awareness with a constant stream of thoughts,
impulses, images, and feelings, all of which have one purpose: To absorb your
attention completely and use the energy of awareness to maintain perception,
understanding, and experience, within the narrow limits it has established.
Only thus can the fiction of its existence be maintained. The ego is the
continuation of a mistake in identity made so long ago, it is past remembering.
Only the continuation of that past error can assure its survival, for in the
present the ego is unmasked, and its nothingness is revealed. 

To free your mind of this incessant activity is not an easy task but a
necessary one. You must become aware of its activity at all times, for mind is
always active, it never sleeps. Illusion must be corrected each and every
moment. No untruth can be left to mar your Holy Mind. This requires the
constant action of willingness and dedication to a single purpose. Constant
vigilance has been maintained in defense of the ego. Constant vigilance must be
maintained against it that it may be undone. The mind that is whole is free of
the limitations the ego has imposed upon it. Withdraw your interest in being an
ego in separation, a bodily identity doomed to wither and die, and your mind
will be free to return to its Home in Truth. 

The Holy Spirit will guide you every step of the way, if you permit Him to do
so. This permission must be constantly given, constantly reaffirmed moment by
moment, for the habits that have dominated your mind since time began are well
established and ceaselessly active. The momentum of eons must be reversed and
your life given a new goal and purpose. There is but one meaningful purpose in
this world. 

To awaken from this dream of limitation and death is your purpose here. No
other purpose this world has or ever will have. Too long have you wandered,
alone and friendless, weary unto death. The world has never been your home nor
will it ever be. Your stay here is temporary, as is everything you see and
experience. No lasting happiness is possible in such a place. Yet even here can
peace be found. When the incessant chatter that fills the mind has been
stilled, peace can return and establish its home. Every time peace is chosen
over conflict, and Love over fear, you have taken another step toward Heaven
where the gates will swing open to welcome you back. In truth you have never
left, but in idle dreams you are lost to your Self until the Light gently
shines into your mind to remind and awaken you from the deep sleep of
forgetfulness. 

The Peace of God is not simply the end of conflict; nor is It a state of deep
relaxation, the absence of tension. The Peace of God is not of this world, nor
has It anything to do with the things of this world. You cannot find such peace
here, for It comes from beyond and covers the world and everything in it with
Its blessing. To find the Peace of God, you must want It and value It more than
earthly states and pleasures, more than all goals and accomplishments the world
offers. The Peace of God outshines this place of darkness in every way. 

God will give you this gift of peace when you are ready and willing to receive
it. To be ready is to lay down all defenses and all belief in attack. Attack in
any form is always the denial of peace. Attack always destroys understanding,
for its only goal is destruction. To destroy is to kill, and where murder is
valued, peace will not be found. 

## When You Call
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

To call on the Holy Spirit for help in solving every problem that confronts
you, is the only wholly sane thing to do. He, and He alone, has the vision and
understanding to see all consequences of all possible responses and their
effect upon everyone involved. To ask for and accept His guidance is to assure
that only good will result from your decision in every way. The decision He
directs you to make will always be in your best and highest interest. You will
be guided away from pain, in a way that will only strengthen you. All decisions
should be referred to His guidance if you would leave pain, suffering, and
limitation behind. 

Truth cannot be realized until mind has been purified and made ready for Its
return. The Holy Spirit’s function is to guide you from dreams to awakening,
from illusion to Truth. He does this by guiding you through a process of
undoing all you have learned under the ego’s tutelage, and then replacing false
ideas and beliefs with true ideas that point to and reflect the Truth. All that
you have taught yourself is false, and the effects of your learning are the
confusion, uncertainty, and suffering that characterize human life. 

To learn what is true must precede the experiencing of Truth, for It cannot
enter a mind dedicated to maintaining illusion. Illusion has replaced Truth in
your mind and experience. One or the other will occupy your mind and shape your
understanding, but not both. As has been often said, you cannot serve two
masters. The importance of correcting your thinking cannot be overemphasized.
Your thoughts make the world you see, and your thoughts shape your perception.
In literal terms you see the world you want to see, and it is thought that
makes this possible. All thought that originates from the ego consciousness,
has as its purpose, to mislead you into choosing and maintaining the illusion
of separation and all that it entails. 

Freedom and peace require that you learn to choose differently, and that your
basis for choosing be completely transformed. With the ego as your guide, all
choice is based on the thought system of separation. The ego identifies with
the body as its home, and sees itself surrounded by a hostile and uncaring
world against which it must defend itself constantly. Sometimes it must attack
in order to protect its interests; and its attack is always justified for it
sees its brother as guilty and thus maintains its innocence. Scarcity stalks
the ego’s world. For one to gain, another must lose, with gain and loss
constantly shifting back and forth in changing patterns. Never can lasting
security be found but must always be wrested from life no matter what the
condition or circumstance. Never can the ego relax its vigilance, for it trusts
no one completely or consistently. 

The Holy Spirit teaches a thought system that is the opposite of the ego’s in
every way. He teaches that you are not separate from anyone or anything you
see. Under His gentle guidance, you will learn you and your brother are One,
always have been and always will be;  you share a common purpose and goal
regardless of appearances. You will learn to see a forgiven world, a kind and
loving world, as you choose to give up attack and lay down all defenses. The
world will be freed of the burden of fear and guilt you have laid upon it. 

As your mind is healed and your spiritual vision awakened, you will see Heaven
reflected here, the Love and Light of God everywhere. This Light will shine
forth from all living things and in that Light are you joined with your brother
as One. Nothing will threaten you for you will know you are not a body. Only
bodies can be threatened, can attack and be attacked. This is the stuff of
dreams, but dreams mean nothing to the dreamer whose eyes are opening to the
Truth that waits beyond all dreams. 

Under the Holy Spirit’s guidance, you must learn to recognize the falsity that
characterizes your mind and dominates your thinking. A mind so long accustomed
to the darkness of illusion, must become aware of its prison and how it is
maintained. Steps must be taken to release the self-imposed bonds that prevent
freedom. You begin by becoming conscious of how your thoughts control and
direct your responses, how they limit understanding and keep the past alive in
the present. The past must be recognized for what it is: a stale repetition of
lessons learned long ago, lessons that have no meaning now. Yet you cling to
them and repeat them again and again as if the past were still here before you. 

To give the Holy Spirit the power of decision for your life, is ultimately
necessary if you are to return to Heaven. He alone knows the way and what must
be done at every step. He holds your part in the Great Plan in His Mind until
you are ready to accept your responsibility for it. Then he reveals it to you
little by little, as you become more willing to receive it. You have a special
part to play in God’s Plan for salvation that can be filled only by you. Your
strengths and abilities are used, and your awakening to the Truth of your Being
is its core and foundation. No one but you can fulfill your part;  the Great
Plan is incomplete without you. All of God’s Sons are needed, for the Plan was
created for Them and no one is excluded. 

When you turn your mind over to the Guide God has given you, happiness can
return and joy can be yours once again. Without His help, you will repeat the
same errors over and over. Your life will be stuck in a repeating pattern of
anxiety and futility, with no escape. There is no way out of the dilemma you
have made without help. This help must come from outside the narrow circle that
contains your mind and defines your existence. The Holy Spirit dwells in your
higher mind, just as the ego lives in lower mind; the part contained and
defined by partial perception and apparent physical limitations. From His
vantage point, He sees what you see but recognizes it as illusion. He
understands that to you it is real in your experience. He must work with your
mind where it is and with what it has made and surrounded itself with: a world
of many separate forms, of uncertainty and danger, of attack and defense. All
that you have made and believe in must be reinterpreted, all false belief
corrected, and everything given another purpose. 

The purpose of the world according to the ego’s thought system is to keep you
in bondage. To the ego, your safety lies behind thick prison walls and
bristling defenses. You must be shown and gently led to the understanding that
your safety is not found by attacking or defending yourself against what is not
real, but by laying down all defenses in the recognition you cannot be attacked
or threatened in any way. When this understanding is established in your mind,
you can begin the process of giving up attack and defense. This is done thought
by thought as you learn to recognize error, withdraw your support, and allow
the Holy Spirit to correct all attack thoughts of any kind that enter your
awareness. The laying down of all belief in the efficacy of attack, opens your
mind to Love. Where It is welcome, Love rushes in, preparing your mind for the
full return of Truth. 

## Forgiveness
{: .ui.header.center.aligned}

Forgiveness and the renunciation of all attack are inextricably linked. To
refuse to forgive is to condemn, and all condemnation is attack just as all
forgiveness is the expression of Love. Love without forgiveness is impossible,
for Love sees only the Holiness and innocence of God’s Son; It is incapable of
grievances and condemnation. Love knows the Reality of God’s Creation and
rushes to join It, overlooking all illusion. As an aspect of God Himself, Love
has nothing to do with illusion and is unaffected by it in any way. Forgiveness
is the highest expression of Love in this world. Through Its unflinching and
all encompassing application, is Heaven Itself reflected. 

Forgiveness is the function of those who would bring Love in a world made dark
by hate, peace to a place of fear and conflict. Peace accompanies Love as
surely as conflict follows fear. Love is the opposite of fear in every way, and
in Its Presence is fear healed. Forgiveness reacts not to fear and hate,
refusing all condemnation no matter what the appearance. Under its gentle gaze
are the effects of all appearances undone, all pain healed, all conflict
resolved. There is nothing forgiveness cannot heal through the miracle of Love
it offers. 

Forgiveness is the home of those who love God. To live in a state of mind
characterized by forgiveness, is to offer God’s Love and blessing to all
without exception. To truly love your brother is to accept him as he is, and
overlook all apparent transgressions he appears to have committed against you
or anyone. Forgiveness remembers neither you nor your brother are bodies, and
therefore whatever your bodies may do or say cannot be held against you.
Nothing that seems to happen in this world of dreams can be held against God’s
Son, for nothing here is real. You cannot attack or be attacked except in
dreams and who, awake to Reality, would believe in dreams? 

Forgiveness rests on the sure recognition there is nothing to forgive, for in
dreams nothing real is happening. God’s Son merely imagines what he sees, and
experiences imaginary effects. Hallucinations and their effects seem real to
those who believe in them. The power of mind expressed through belief makes the
effects seem real. You have been given the power to create like God. You can
misuse this power, and you have, by making, by miscreating a world that could
never exist. The mind believes in what it makes; and this belief gives your
world its imaginary power to affect you. Withdraw your belief and its effects
will cease. Withdraw your mind entirely and the world you see before you will
disappear. Forgiveness will lead to the end of the world of separation as
surely as fear and guilt perpetuate it. As an all conditional expression of
Love, forgiveness will quietly heal all appearances of guilt through the
recognition they are not true. Guilt is the dark cornerstone on which the ego’s
thought system rests. As that thought system gives rise to a world of fear,
pain, and separation, so will the world be transformed when its foundation has
been undone and replaced by Love.

