---
title: "A Mystical Relationship"
subtitle: "Clarifications by Sebastian Blaksley"
---

## I. Relative to Love

During the manifestations received, I was given to understand that the work
would be composed of one hundred and forty-four sessions, which should be
grouped into seven books. I was also informed of the titles of each of them,
even before receiving their content. The titles will be, respectively, Echoes
of Holiness, Let Yourself Be Loved, Homo-Christus Deo, Wisdom, The Holy
Dwelling, The Divine Relationship, and The Way of Being. Each book will consist
of twenty-one sessions, with the exception of the seventh which will have
eighteen.

There is a numerical relationship whose explanation exceeds the purpose of
these writings, but which was shown to me so that it can be understood that in
divine creation there is harmony and order in everything. Nothing happens
outside the harmonies of Heaven. This order is governed by love, which
contains all perfection within itself.

Based on what I received, it is clearly understood that everything exists in
relationship. Nothing but love is absolute. Relationship connects all with
everything as well as with source.

The relationship of the numbers of books, total sessions, and sessions per book
within this work establishes a divine numerical relationship. The numbers
themselves are symbols that carry a message from heaven.

## II. Christ Incarnated

The one hundred and forty-four sessions are a living expression of “the
Redeemed of the Lamb.” I was given to understand that this symbol represents
the millions of people and beings that on this Earth, in these times, are here
incarnating the Christ of God, creating a new Heaven and a new Earth by
extending the love of Jesus and Mary, just as the resurrection of Christ has
established it from all eternity. They are the preparers of the Second Coming.
They are incarnated Christs. Christs are incarnating all over the world, in all
religions, contexts, genders, ages, and realms.

With the word “realms” I mean that the incarnation of Christ, which is the
miraculous gift of the resurrection, as part of the Second Coming, is not
something that only happens in human beings but in all the living kingdoms of
the Earth. The Redeemed of the Lamb are not something exclusive to an
institution or religious tradition. In fact, it is not related to forms of
religion at all, but to spirituality. They are the ones who have consciously
made the choice for love. That is why this work is named as it is. I understood
this some time after I received the title, which was given to me in a different
way from how I receive the manifestations.

The number of sessions in each book, twenty-one, represents and carries within
itself a spiritual transformation, which has a rhythm and can only be created
as an effect of love. It is also related to pure divine reality. It represents
the way of being of the One who created life, who is three times holy, and
seven times true.

The number of books, seven, brings the reality of wisdom, of pure thought. It
refers the soul to the truth from which it emerges, the pure thought of God.
These numerical relations are somewhat like a rhythm, the timing and silences
of music. They allow the whole reach a beauty that can only be created in
harmony.

## III. Beyond Words

Since the thinking mind is incapable of absorbing the deep meanings of divine
truth, it is impossible at the intellectual level to understand the purpose
of the structure and content of the sessions and books of the complete work.
However, the soul can recognize truth when it makes an appearance, despite the
fact that it cannot be put into words. Thus both the content and the way in
which these writings have been structured are part of the totality of this
manifestation.

The tone, color, and rhythm of the words of this work cause an effect on the
heart that is open to receive them for what they are: a letter of love given
from Heaven to grow in a greater knowledge of God’s love—a gift given with
the very love with which it was received.

As you go through each book you can grow in the awareness of the direct
relationship with Christ, your true self. In this sense, this work is a journey
in which the soul goes hand in hand with love, a journey without distance that
begins and ends in the Heart of God.

I hope that these words will lead you to love more, through the return to the
first love that is God. Thus they will have fulfilled the purpose from which,
for all eternity, they were conceived.

