---
title: "Final Words"
subtitle: "A message from the Voice of Christ through a Choir of Angels in the presence of Archangel Raphael and Archangel Gabriel"
---

Beloved souls in love, in love with Christ,

The time has come to let the seeds of a wisdom that is not of the world be
planted in Eden, in the sanctity of your heart, and be nourished by the waters
of silence. In this way, at the right time, you will begin to sprout the
offspring of love and further embellish the majestic beauty of your being.

We, the angels of God, your friends and your companions, thank you with all our
heart for this time in which you allow us to dwell with you in this particular
way. You gave us the treasure of your time, your dedication, your mind, and
your soul, and received with love these words that have been given to you by
love. You will not be able—in the world—to know for sure how much beauty,
harmony, bliss, and love you spill over into creation every time you join in
prayer to the source of life that is God. The union that you make real when you
join this work is an expression of Heaven for you and for the whole world.

Always remember that we are one mind, one heart, one soul— one God. We are the
unity of self. United, we are the sacred heart. Remember that we rest together
in the arms of love. Remember that your self shines in the holiness that you
are in truth, and lives eternally in the union of the Immaculate Heart of Mary
and the Sacred Heart of Jesus, the refuge of holy love for souls.

These words are not a farewell, but an expression of pure love. They are a song
of praise for you who fervently desire union with Christ, because in the depths
of your being you recognize the voice of truth and follow it. This is a love
letter to you from the Father.

These final words are a bridge that unites one dwelling with another. A bridge
that will allow us, together, to continue traveling the path of love and
truth, a path of joy and peace. We do not say goodbye, because we will continue
to live with you, and because new expressions of the truth that is always true
will be given to you, by the design of the Heavenly Father, for the joy of your
self and the salvation of the world.

We, the angels of God, your friends and your companions, will be at your
side—and in you—all the days of your life, until the consummation of time. You
will be in our hearts for all eternity, rejoicing in the joy of eternal life.

Thank you, daughters and sons of God, for your Yes to love. You have chosen the
best part and it will not be taken away from you. You have chosen to dwell
eternally in an abode of light that will never wane. You have chosen truth to
be your friend and eternal companion. You have chosen holiness as the only
truth of your being. You have chosen to manifest as the living Christ who lives
in you. You have made the choice for love.

Blessed be all souls and all creation!

